Hey Coaches, in this video you're going to see coaching by one of the InviteChange Master Certified Coaches, Carl Franco. This session was recorded by George Mason University and they have given us permission to share it with you here on YouTube. Thanks for watching and let us know in the comments what you think about this session where you would have made different choice points and other questions you might have asked. Eric,  delighted to get to spend some time with you today in exploration and discovery. Hey, you too Carl, you too. Sorry, I'm just hiding my people who are...  , now I've got your face.  we got to put on a good show for these guys, Carl. No pressure, no pressure. I love how you said earlier, , I think I got something. I think it'll be good. I think . Yeah, how interesting that even that performance notion just always seems to be in the ether. Yeah, yeah. No, I was  hoping that it's something that's come up. I was hoping I wouldn't have to decide because I knew there was coaching. I was , oh, maybe I can, I can.  it's a real thing. I got a real thing. Yeah. Awesome. Yeah. We're brand new to each other. We've got about 29 minutes in our history thus far. I wonder if there are, I'm curious if there are any agreements, , maybe a couple of agreements that we could put in place that would accelerate our trust in this partnership today? Yeah, yeah. One I can think of is if my face gets blurry, which it sometimes does, will you tell me? Because I'm looking at you, brother, not me. , I can do that. That's a simple one. That's a good one. Yeah, yeah. Anything meatier than that one? No, just , you're a coach, buddy, go for it. Yeah, yeah, all good. Yeah, don't have to, yeah, just do your thing, man. Yeah, that's why we're here. Yeah, that's all I got. Yeah, I'm not worried. Awesome. Where would you  to be at the end of the session today?  I'm really, and I can explain it. I want to get ahead of things. But I've got this question. It's about travel. I can tell you the whole, you want me to tell you  the whole, kind of the background? Is that ? Yeah, I mean. , let me just give you the gist of it. I won't take long. Awesome.  the gist of it, and just to call this out, the first world problem, there's people in Turkey digging out of rubble, there's war in Ukraine.  this is a very first world thing.  the quick version is, I grew up in Thailand, lived there till I was 17, came to the States when I was 18-ish, and went back once, and really haven't been back to Thailand since about 96. I went back when I was in early 20s. And  since that time I've come to the States, I have happily married, I have family, I have all these kids and stuff. And I was supposed to take my family for the first time to Asia in the summer of 2020. But of course, the pandemic stopped that. And  now we're trying to decide, we're looking at, well, and my kids are , I have two 12-year-olds, a 10-year-old and a five-year-old. And  we're , is this the time we want to go back? And  my wife and I are looking at airplane tickets. And just the flyest there is  nine grand. And probably if we stay for a couple of weeks, it'll wind up being about 17 grand total. And  my wife is , we can do this. And it's also my 50th birthday this year, too.  that's fun. We can do this, but is this something you really want to do? And  I'm really conflicted because in my mind, I'm , and I'm going to should myself. In my mind, I'm , I should. This is epic, of course. But I don't know if I'm feeling it. And part of my whole identity is wrapped up into bringing the family back to the motherland and hanging out with monkeys and elephants. And  I have to let my wife know today because she's planning summer camps.  this is all very, I don't know what the fuck to do. And  to answer your question, I would love just to have some clarity around this. It's a very first world problem. But in this space where you and I are, there is no other world, ? Yeah.  let's just release that as a pressure. . Yeah. I was going to ask, what has this being  meaningful for you today? But you clearly answered that. Your wife needs an answer today. Yeah, kind of. Yeah. I mean, if we want a couple of days, it'd be . But yeah, sort of need an answer. Yeah. And she just emailed me how much to go on the Star Cruiser down at Disney,  the price comparison.  she's not saying, just literally while we were meeting you, she emailed this to me. I don't get pressure from her that it's not to do it. But she's sort of , is this really what we want to do? And normally I'd be , hell yes, but I'm kind of not feeling it. And that's really disorienting. Yeah. Eric, how do  clarity for yourself? When you're clear on something, what's the experience that you're having? Yeah. I mean, it's a great question. I think it's, I just feel the sense of flow, ? It's the sense of just real knowing. It's really intangible. Yeah. For instance, when I signed up for this course, I knew it  away, ? I mean, it was just , not even a question. And I kind of don't have that around this. And I don't know why. Yeah. And where do you feel the flow?  what part of your being does that come from? Yeah. I mean, I kind of physically feel it in my forehead. But in terms of the being, I think it's just hard to explain. It's really just a knowing, ? It's just this, it's just really clear. It's this clear knowing that's really black and white.  it's just  certainty. It's , I will be doing that. Yeah. And of all the things in the world, this should be  the most certain. , I mean, to make a long story short,  this is . Yeah. It's big. It's a lot wrapped up in this, ? Yeah. And I just, and I don't know whether I'm just being lazy or it's the money, or maybe I'm worried that  I pumped it up too much in my mind. And it just, I just, but I just kind of feeling it. And I don't know why. What have you been tapping into thus far in grasping for that clarity? Yeah. I mean, I think, , for many years, , ,  I came back to the States and, , I was very disoriented and , I could make them tell you a lot of stories. . But I mean, it's , and this was a while ago, this was, , until I was about maybe mid twenties, 30, maybe. And, and it was, , , that was the, , everything was , nothing's as good as there. . It was very , nothing's as good as there. Nobody understands. Nobody is, I mean, this is gets really sort of arrogant, ?  nobody's has traveled as much as I have. . I worked, I used to work for a lady and she was the first person I met who traveled more than I had. And, but I was , , nobody's traveled as much. Nobody can understand. I can't really relate to people. And, and I sort of got, I sort of overcame that. It's just  when I got married and had kids, I was , , this is legit. .  this stuff here,  it counts. And, and  it's just really disorienting to be , well, shouldn't that old stuff matter? , and it sort of feels almost  I'm betraying,  I'm dishonoring it somehow. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. What meaning are you making around this trip? Yeah. Sorry. Sorry. I knew this shit was going to happen. Sorry. I think it's. Sorry.  this is  kind of the closest place I have to home geographically. Yeah. Other than my family, which is also home. And it's, and it's  this, this kind of tug of war between those two. Yeah. I don't know. Maybe  my real home is not  my family as opposed to  this place that I haven't been to in  30 years. And  , maybe I don't need to go there. Yeah. Not sure. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Sorry. Yeah. I'm  appreciating. Yeah. The enormity of this. This is. Yeah. This is bigger than making a decision on a family vacation, ? Yeah. I guess . I just. Yeah, I just, yeah, I just, I'm not sure, , , am I  dishonoring that past and I just don't know. Yeah.  it's hard. And just, , to throw in something else for fun. I lost my mom about 18 months ago. Oh,  sorry. And , , , that's  thrown in there too. And I'm . But, , maybe it's OK, maybe. , maybe I'm giving it too much meaning. I'm just not sure. Not sure. Yeah. What values are you wrestling with as you think about go, not to go? Yeah. Great question. I mean, I think part of it is , I'm not a big, , I sort of  to take risks. . , I'm a bit , I  to at least think of myself as somebody who, , if it's , if it's , if it's  actor, not act  I err on the side of act always, even if it's scary. ,  part of me is , wow, that's really sort of off brand to , not go. , of course, why? I mean, you go. And  and then the other side of it is , , I, I don't know if I'm is , , I want to do what's best for my family. And I, and while they get a ton out of it, it's a super long trip. , it's really expensive. I mean, we'd be . But, , , would they have more fun doing something else? Would they learn more doing something else? And  it's this sort of allegiance and responsibility to  all this past stuff. It's maybe just relevant to me versus or not even . Because I'm not even feeling it old versus maybe not  wedded to it. There's a real should going on and I hate that word. . But there's a real should going on. Yeah. And it's a puzzling. Yeah. Sorry. Please. Oh, no. Shoulds and maybes. Yeah. Babies. Yeah. And you just, you just expressed how you're, you're, , my experience of what you said were your MO is decisive risk-taking. Yeah. Yeah. Sure. What has you curious about the shoulds and maybes in this decision? Yeah, no, thank you for that. I mean, I think it's, it's puzzling that I'm not , just go. , that's puzzling to me  that. I don't have that. And I'm wondering if maybe I've got it backwards. And this is  weird for me to think about. But , maybe, maybe the risky thing to do or the edgy thing to do is to not go. Is to be , fuck it. I, and that's just, it's  backwards and  surprising and unexpected. Because I'm really kind of not feeling it. I mean, I was thinking about it all day today. I was , , I should be more.  I was going to use excitement as a compass. ? , that's sort of how sometimes how I  to live. , I'm excited about it. , that's a sign that that's a thing. And I'm just not feeling  it's , and I don't think my compass is broken. And  it's just, I mean, if I was going to follow my intuition, my intuition is kind of saying no. And I just, and  maybe it's, , it's , I don't know. I mean, it's, it would really be trusting that intuition because everything logical says, dude, are you crazy? Of course you go.  you've been planning this,  before you even got married and had a family, ? And  it's just, it's just  puzzling. Yeah. Yeah. Sorry. Who else sits on your internal board of advisors? You said excitement, intuition. Oh God. Yeah.  Alexander's listening to this. He'll  this.  I've got this, I've got this, if we talk in terms of parts work, . I got this guy called the judge and the judge is  Venom, Spider-Man, the guy in black, , he's  scary and got claws and stuff. And he's, and he's,  the judge says a lot of stuff. And of course, when I tell the judge to settle down, he turns into the guys from the Muppet show, the guys in the balconies, , he said stuff, but it's, it's harmless. And ,  maybe that's that guy in terms of board of directors, who's there saying who's judge is sitting in judgment thinking, well, maybe, , of course you're going to go, it'd be treasonous not to go. It'd be heretical not to go. Cause he's really old. The judge is old. I mean, and he,  he probably remembers the time I lived in Asia. Yeah. I hadn't really thought of that. Anything you want to ask or say to the judge? No, he's really fucking scary. He's really scary. Really scary. I mean, I suppose I could say that maybe that part just needs reassurance. That by not going, it doesn't, it doesn't have to mean anything, ,  it doesn't have to, it doesn't have to mean anything more than I make it. It doesn't have to mean that I'm selling out or I'm being too tame or I'm not being, , I'm playing it safe. Oh, I fucking hate that. Playing it saves the worst. .   maybe, maybe it's that part that's judging me for doing that, for playing it safe. Cause I almost feel  I'd be going  now that I think I almost feel  I'd be going into , please, please somebody. And, and I don't know who that would be other than myself. , yeah. Eric, if you decided not to go, what would you want to make it mean? What would you choose to make it mean? Well, I think it would be, it would be a real sign of  letting that go. I mean, there's a lot of old stuff,  just letting that go.  just letting that go.  that doesn't have to be my North star.  there can be other things that, , are as cool as that. Which would be a big deal. Yeah. Yeah. And what would you fill that void with? Oh, there's  much, . It could be  coaching stuff I want to do this year. It could be, yeah. I mean, it could be, there's  much I want to do  this year,  for the rest of this year,  all kinds of stuff I want to do. Especially around my business, around my coaching. And, , I hadn't even really, it's been such kind of a foregone conclusion that we would do that. And it was going to take, it was going to suck up  much money and  much, see, I don't have to worry about leave. I work for myself, but my wife does. . And  that it would just open up  much possibility. I mean, there'd be a lot of benefits to it. It would just open up  much possibility. I mean, there'd be a lot of benefits to it. It would take a lot of pressure off. I might even get a chip with my wife because, , yeah. Yeah. I mean, it would be, it'd be a lot of possibility. Yeah. What are you noticing about energy and use the word flow? What are you noticing about energy and flow as you're talking about? Such a good question. Such a good question, Carl. I mean, yeah, I think I feel more energy around this. The other,  to go feels  a lot. It almost feels  it would be a chore and to not go almost kind of feels  a relief. It doesn't have to mean anything. It doesn't have to mean we'll never go. Maybe it just means we'll go when  airline prices are cheaper or Hong Kong just announced this thing where they're , they're going to fly the first five, half a million people  for free.  maybe we jump on that bandwagon for  the fall or the spring. Hong Kong's totally cool.  it doesn't have to be   all or nothing. It could just be ,  you said, maybe, maybe not yet. Maybe not yet. That  feels a lot better. I think it feels  we're forcing it  expensive and  talking about  going through Tokyo and it's . But I want to go to , there's  many other places. Yeah. It just doesn't feel  it's .  the energy around that I think is better. Yeah. And I don't even really think I'd have much of any regret.  I think once I make the decision, I think it could be really empowering. Yeah. What's that judge doing  now? , yeah. He's skeptical. He's skeptical, ? Sounds  improvement. We went from. Yeah, he's skeptical. He's not  all snarly. He's sort of Muppet   now. Yeah. Either tranquilizer for the judge, , those darts from wild kingdom with a little feathers on the back, , Lauren green, , and just, , that's what we need for the, ,  yeah, he's calming down. It just, I really  what we've said about possibility. It just opens up  many other possibilities. It takes  much pressure off. Yeah. Yeah. I think it's good.  how would you, how would you describe your clarity? I mean, I think it's surprising. It's, , , super helpful. Thank you. , , in terms of the,  logically it's completely twisted, but  in terms of intuition and energy,  it, it really, it, , I think there's clear, there's way clarity there. Yeah. Yeah. How are you feeling in your forehead? , yeah, it's there. I mean, it's  there. Thanks for asking about that. It's, it's    that whole, I mean, sorry, I swear a lot when I get excited, but it's kind of , fuck it. . It's , , it's , it's , , it's , , it's , it's just , fuck it. It's , , , we   much, sorry, but   much has changed in the last couple of years, especially for me personally, but also just the world and just , just fuck it. , , we don't have to do  all the things we, we thought we would and it could change again. And I, I just, I just think you go with that. I mean, I think that's the vibe  now. Yeah. I mean, who knows what could happen?  I think it's, I think it's . Yeah.  as you leave this session today and leave even the class, what do you, what do you do with this clarity?  what's next steps? Well, my wife, my wife's going to, , I think I'll talk to my wife and be , yeah, I think we can, I think we can hold on this and maybe have a conversation about what else we would do, what else we can do. , maybe have a conversation about if we don't go  this summer,  maybe we go again, maybe a time of year where it's not  expensive. , I mean, it just opens up all kinds of things.  I think that's . And I really did not have this 30 minutes ago.  I, I'm really  thank brother. Thank you.  really helpful. , it's good. Yeah. Yeah. Experiencing a, a, a huge lightness in you. Yeah. No, it's a sense of relief. I mean, it's, , yeah, I have clarity around this,  that clarity,  that, that inner knowing,  it was just, it just, it was just, I think it was just covered up by a lot of expectation. , a lot of should, , it's still scary. But, , I think it's the, I think in some ways it's, it's the, it's the risky thing to do, which I ,  it's good. Yeah. It's good. I love how you reframed the risk in this. Yeah. Yeah. The risky thing is to stay do something else. Yeah. Which I, which, which works. Yeah. That's good. Any other support you need in this? Thanks. Thanks, Carl.  you, you really helpful. I really appreciate it. I'm glad I raised my hand. ,  am I good. Love it. Thank you, Rick. Thank you, brother. Thank you.