
Advanced Praise
"Marcia's training with our internal team of coaches was tremendously 
impactful. There were three key benefits. Firstly, it improved our ability 
to coach leaders and navigate difficult conversations with more 
confidence and effectiveness; secondly, through increasing our 
awareness of listening with brain, heart and gut we are better coaches; 
and thirdly, it brought us closer as a team by fostering more trust and 
openness." 
— Amee Olson, Director, Coaching and Executive Development
"Anyone who can strip away the mystery of coaching and show it as an 
everyday way of connecting with other humans is a hero in my books. 
Marcia Reynolds is that person. You should read Coach the Person so 
you can change people's lives." 
— Michael Bungay Stanier, author of the WSJ bestseller The 
        Coaching Habit
"Marcia, a true pioneer in the field says 'coaching shouldn't be so hard' 
and yet, we have hopelessly complicated things for many newer coaches.  
Marcia, in her straightforward, brilliantly articulated way navigates us to 
simplicity on the far side of the complexity in her definitive guide to 
breakthrough coaching." 
— Madeleine Homan Blanchard, MCC MSc, Co-Founder Coaching 
        Services, The Ken Blanchard Companies
"Dr. Marcia Reynolds provokes the reader to explore ways of partnering 
with clients and coaching beyond the 'sacred cows'  and rigidly 
prescribed questioning techniques. She also does a great service to the 
profession by elevating the conversation above conflicting coaching 
schools or cults and urging us to refocus again on the human being we 
partner with." 
— Prof. Konstantin Korotov, PhD, ESMT Berlin

MARCIA REYNOLDS
coach the
person,
not the problem
A Guide to Using
Reﬂective 
Inquiry
Berrett–Koehler Publishers, Inc.

vii
Contents
Introduction: Asking Questions Is Not the Same as Inquiry 
1
Part I: What Is a Coaching Conversation? 
9
1 What Makes Coaching the Person So Powerful? 
19
2 Crazy Coaching Beliefs 
35
Part II: Te Five Essential Practices 
51
3 Focus: Coaching the Person, Not the Problem 
55
4 Active Replay: Playing Back the Pivotal Pieces for Review 
63
5 Brain Hacking: Finding the Treasures in the Box 
89
6 Goaltending: Staying the Course 
111
7 New and Next: Coaching Insights and Commitments 
137
Part III: Te Tree Mental Habits 
149
8 Align Your Brain 
155
9 Receive (Don’t Just Listen) 
167
10 Catch and Release Judgment 
177
Wrap-Up:  Beyond the Conversation: Coaching as a Lifestyle 
and a Culture 
189
Notes 
195
Acknowledgments 
201
Index  
203
About the Author 
209

1
I N T R O D U C T I O N
Asking Questions Is Not 
the Same as Inquiry
  , leadership actions, and coaching 
guidelines outline rules for asking good questions. Common 
rules include ask open questions; start with what, when, where, 
how, and who; and avoid why questions.
Tese suggestions are misleading.
Coaches and leaders spend more time trying to remember 
the questions they’re supposed to ask than paying attention to 
the person they are coaching. 1 Tey end up “checklist coaching” 
to ensure their questions follow the model they were taught in 
coaching school or a leadership workshop, which is more frus-
trating for the client than helpful.
Not only do coaches spend more time in their own heads than 
listening, they make coaching more complex than it should be. 
Tey don’t realize that being present and using reﬂective state-
ments such as summarizing, paraphrasing, and drawing dis-
tinctions can be more powerful—and easier—than seeking the 
magical question. When a coach asks a question after providing 
a reﬂection, the question is more likely to arise out of curiosity, 

2
COACH THE PERSON, NOT THE PROBLEM
not memory. At this point, even a closed question can lead to a 
breakthrough in thinking.
Coaching should be a process of inquiry, not a series of ques-
tions. Te intent of inquiry is not to ﬁnd solutions but to pro-
voke critical thinking about our own thoughts. Inquiry helps 
the people being coached discern gaps in their logic, evaluate 
their beliefs, and clarify fears and desires aﬀecting their choices. 
Solutions emerge when thoughts are rearranged and expanded.
Statements that prompt us to look inside our brains are reﬂec-
tive. Tey trigger reﬂection. Reﬂective statements include recap-
ping, labeling, using metaphors, identifying key or conﬂicting 
points, and recognizing emotional shifts. Inquiry combines ques-
tions with reﬂective statements.
Questions seek answers;  
inquiry provokes insight.
When using reﬂective statements in coaching, clients hear 
their words, see how their beliefs form their perceptions, and 
face the emotions they are expressing. Ten, a follow-up question 
that either conﬁrms (Is this true for you?) or prompts explora-
tion (when the coach is curious about what, when, where, how, 
or who) provokes clients to look into their thoughts.
Reflective statements + questions =  
reflective inquiry.
Adding reﬂective statements to questions makes coaching 
feel more natural and eﬀortless. You don’t have to worry about 
formulating the breakthrough question.

Asking Questions Is Not the Same as Inquiry
3
Pairing reflective statements with questions 
frees the coach of the weight of finding the 
perfect/best/right question.
On the other hand, some professionals who call themselves 
coaches ask questions for the purpose of determining what advice 
to give. Tey criticize the International Coaching Federation 
(ICF), formerly known as the International Coach Federation, 
for rigidly imposing requirements around question asking. A 
Harvard psychology professor told me she wasn’t an ICF creden-
tialed coach because her high-level executive clients didn’t want 
her to ask about how they were feeling. “It’s a waste of time to 
question their thoughts and emotions,” she said. “Tey want my 
expertise. Tey are clueless and need advice or a kick in the butt.” 
It’s possible that’s what her clients need, but that isn’t coaching. 
It’s face-slapping mentoring.
I fear the loss of coaching as a distinct profession when the 
word coaching is diluted by people preferring to give advice. 
Coaching is an eﬀective technology for helping people quickly 
reframe, shift perspective, and redeﬁne themselves and their situ-
ations. Coaches act as thinking partners for people who are stuck 
inside their stories and perceptions. Tey help clients think more 
broadly for themselves, beyond their blinding fears, inherited 
beliefs, and half-baked assumptions that limit possible actions. 
As a result of this new perspective, clients discover new solu-
tions, take action on solutions they had avoided, and commit to 
long-term behavioral changes more often than when they are told 
what to do.
Te goal of coaching is to get clients to stop and question the 
thoughts and behaviors that limit their perspective so they can 

4
COACH THE PERSON, NOT THE PROBLEM
see a new way forward to achieve their desires. Reﬂective prac-
tices provide an instant replay for clients to observe themselves 
telling their stories. Te questions then help clients identify the 
beliefs and behavioral patterns they are using. Tey see for them-
selves what patterns are ineﬀective, even damaging. If done with 
patience and respect, it’s likely your clients will clearly see what 
they need to do without your brilliant advice.
Te use of reﬂective inquiry as a powerful learning technol-
ogy has been around for over one hundred years. I’ll explain the 
origins of reﬂective inquiry in part I.
Coaching Shouldn’t Be So Hard
Using reﬂective inquiry with a caring and appreciative presence 
creates a connection where clients feel safe to critically explore 
how they think. Clients don’t feel pressured to explore their blocks 
more deeply; they naturally go deeper. Hearing their own words 
prompts them to willingly dissect the meaning of their statements. 
Tey admit when their words are defensive rationalizations for 
behavior that doesn’t align with their core values and desires.
When you coach as a thinking partner instead of an expert, 
your job is to catch and return what you are given by the client. 
You don’t have to concoct a masterful question. You don’t need to 
ﬁgure out if what you want to say is intuition or a blatant projec-
tion of your own needs. You don’t have to have all the answers. 
You are a good coach if you share what you hear and see and 
maybe oﬀer what you sense is happening with no attachment to 
being right.
You will probably ask a question after you share what you 
heard, saw, and sensed, but the question will come out of your 
reﬂection, not your overused “good questions” list.

Asking Questions Is Not the Same as Inquiry
5
When I teach these techniques, coaches from around the 
world say things like this:
“Tank you. You freed me from the tyranny of asking the 
perfect question.”
“I feel so much lighter after watching you coach.”
“You showed me how to have fun with my coaching.”
“Yes! Be present, be the mirror, and lighten up!”
Tis book will show how anyone wanting to use a coaching 
approach in conversations can use reﬂective inquiry to be more 
present and eﬀective. Te methods and examples will demon-
strate how to achieve memorable and meaningful results whether 
you are a professional coach or a leader, parent, teacher, or friend 
using a coaching approach in your conversations.
What’s in This Book
In part I, I will clarify what practices are needed to have a con-
versation focused on coaching the person to better think through 
dilemmas. Since the word coaching has been applied to a range of 
activities, I want us to begin with a common understanding of 
the framework we will be exploring.
Chapter 1 explains why this method of coaching—reﬂective 
inquiry—is so powerful in changing minds and leading to long-
term behavioral change. I’ll describe how reﬂective inquiry maps 
to the brain science around insight formation, an important ele-
ment in learning, and how coaching supports clients to explore 
their thinking in a way they can’t do themselves.
Te ﬁrst chapter also takes a look at the ideal moments to 
put on a coaching hat. Coaching isn’t intended to be used in all 
situations. You will annoy your employees, friends, and spouse 

6
COACH THE PERSON, NOT THE PROBLEM
if you’re always a coach. You need good reason and sometimes, 
permission. You’ll ﬁnd a list of scenarios considered good oppor-
tunities for coaching.
Chapter 2 explores ﬁve beliefs that have thrown the intention 
of coaching oﬀtrack. I will explain each one, why all of them are 
true only some of the time, and how they limit the eﬀectiveness 
of coaching when interpreted as rigid rules. I will also oﬀer an 
alternative opinion for each belief with examples showing how it 
works within the context of the coaching relationship.
Part II, the heart of this book, will give you an understanding 
of and ways to implement the ﬁve essential practices for break-
through coaching:
1. Focus—coaching the person, not the problem
2. Active Replay—playing back the pivotal pieces for review
3. Brain Hacking—ﬁnding the treasures in the box
4. Goaltending—staying the course
5. New and Next—coaxing insights and commitments
Coaching mastery isn’t just about improving skills; mastery 
also requires that you quickly catch internal disruptions and shift 
back to being fully present with your clients. Part III explains 
and gives exercises for cultivating the three mental habits needed 
to master the practices of reﬂective inquiry:
1. Align your brain.
2. Receive (don’t just listen).
3. Catch and release judgment.
I have had the opportunity to demonstrate to thousands of 
coaches worldwide both the essential practices and mental hab-
its. Either they thank me for what they learned or they thank me 
for what I helped them remember because they knew it all along.
When I teach these practices to leaders, they realize their 
primary excuse for not coaching—I don’t have time—is based in 

Asking Questions Is Not the Same as Inquiry
7
their fear that they can’t coach eﬀectively. Tey have probably 
tried and failed as they grappled to ﬁnd good questions. Tis 
book gives leaders a coaching approach that reduces their fears 
when they discover easy steps to implement for quick and more 
binding results.
Once leaders work with reﬂective inquiry, they discover it is 
the best way to prompt a strong shift in perspective and action 
in a short time. Additionally, the conversations are creative and 
meaningful as well as productive, inspiring others to learn and 
grow. Employees feel seen, heard, and valued—the key to increas-
ing engagement, productivity, and excitement around new ideas.
People who have experienced good coaching say it changed 
their lives. Te essence of coaching isn’t based in problem-solving 
or performance improvement. Tose committed to using reﬂec-
tive inquiry are change agents who actively recharge the human 
spirit. At times when events at work and in the world dampen the 
spirit, coaching brightens the path.

P A R T  I 
What Is a Coaching 
Conversation?
Coaching is so much more  
than asking good questions.
—M R

COACH THE PERSON, NOT THE PROBLEM
10
   of the International Coaching 
Federation asked the question, “What makes coaching diﬀerent 
from therapy and consulting?” Te ICF deﬁnition of coaching 
emerged from this conversation:
Coaching is partnering with clients in a thought-provoking 
and creative process that inspires them to maximize their per-
sonal and professional potential.1
Te key word in the deﬁnition is partnering. Coaches do not 
act as experts or analysts even when they have relevant experi-
ence and education. Coaches are essentially thinking partners 
focused on helping clients use their creativity and resources to 
see beyond their blocks and solve their own problems.
Te passion and commitment that fuels the continual growth 
of coaching is grounded in the coaching experience for both coach 
and client. For me—when I don’t give in to my urge to advise—
nothing is more fulﬁlling than seeing my clients laugh at them-
selves when they realize they’ve been clinging to an outdated belief. 
I love the spark in their eyes when they discover the answer to their 
problems on their own. Tey feel relief and gratitude when they 
recognize they won’t be hurting anyone by following their dreams. 
When I feel the courage in my clients bubble up, it’s my pleasure to 
help them put their desires into motion.
People need to feel seen, heard, and valued to have the desire 
to grow. In this space, their creative brains are activated. Tey feel 
safe enough to explore their own thinking and actions. Surfacing 
their judgments and fears may feel uncomfortable, but when cli-
ents see how to move beyond these blocks, they feel empowered.
Although many gurus have been cited as saying people are 
naturally creative, resourceful, and whole, this concept was ﬁrst 
seen in the work of psychologist Alfred Adler. Adler asked us to 

What Is a Coaching Conversation?
11
believe in the power people feel when realizing their potential. 
He said, “Man knows much more than he understands.”2
In breaking away from the ideas of his teacher Sigmund 
Freud, Adler said we do not have to plumb the depths of one’s 
psychological history to help normal people progress. If, as Adler 
said, “we determine ourselves by the meanings we give to situa-
tions,” then changing or expanding the meaning opens new pos-
sibilities to deﬁne ourselves and our actions.3
Adler’s perspective spawned many modern therapies. Te 
regard Adler held for the masses is a foundational concept for 
coaching. For people who are not seeking therapy but know they 
will beneﬁt from exploring how they think when unsure of deci-
sions or actions, coaching ﬁlls the gap.
Where Does the Term 
 
Come From?
We owe gratitude to Adler for deﬁning the coaching relationship. 
Yet even though coaching may be similar to cognitive behavioral 
therapies and question-based relationship consulting, the actual 
practice of coaching maps more directly to John Dewey’s learning 
theory than to a therapeutic or commercial approach.
In 1910, Dewey deﬁned the practice of reﬂective inquiry in his 
classic book, How We Tink.4 As an educational reformer, Dewey 
wanted to change the practice of dumping information into stu-
dents’ brains and then testing their memorization skills. He wasn’t 
just advocating for teachers to ask more questions. He deﬁned 
methods of inquiry that would prompt students to doubt what 
they thought they knew so they were open to expansive learning.
Dewey felt that combining the tools that provoke critical 
thinking with Socratic questioning would prompt students to go 

COACH THE PERSON, NOT THE PROBLEM
12
inward to give their thoughts serious consideration. Tey would 
then be able to distinguish what they know from what they don’t 
know, conﬁrm or negate a stated belief, and substantiate the value 
of a fear or doubt. He said that metaphorically, reﬂective inquiry 
enables us to climb a tree in our minds.5 We gain a wider view to 
see connections and faults in our thinking to better assess what 
to do next.
Watching the Movie from the Top of the Tree
Reﬂective inquiry includes statements that hold up a mirror to 
our thoughts and beliefs to provoke evaluation. Te practice of 
mirroring, or what I call active replay, includes when the coach 
summarizes, paraphrases, acknowledges key phrases, and shares 
the emotions and gestures clients express. Clients then expand 
on the meaning of their words with explanations or corrections. 
Tey may drop into silence, shifting their eyes up, down, or side-
ways as they look into their thoughts. Coaches will often pause to 
let their clients think. If the pause is unbearably long, the coach 
might oﬀer a reﬂection and question such as “It looks like you are 
considering something. What is coming up for you now?”
When coaches use reﬂective statements, people hear their 
words, see how their beliefs form their perceptions, and face the 
emotions they are expressing. Ten, when coaches follow up with 
a conﬁrming question (“Is this what you believe?”) or explor-
atory question (“What is causing your hesitation?”), clients are 
prompted to stop and examine their thinking.
We use reflective statements plus questions to 
trigger people to reflect on how they think.

What Is a Coaching Conversation?
13
Coaching behaviors include noticing energy shifts, tone of 
voice, pace of speech, inﬂection, and behaviors. Coaches play 
back clients’ beliefs and assumptions to examine their verity and 
limitations. Tey summarize complex outcomes and possibilities, 
oﬀering the statements to clients to accept or alter. Tey oﬀer 
observations when clients show resistance. Tey reﬂect progress to 
reinforce movement and growth. Te goal of oﬀering reﬂective 
statements is not to lead clients in a speciﬁc direction but to help 
them clarify and evaluate their thoughts.
By using reﬂective practices, coaches encourage clients to 
think about what they said and expressed. Te coach accepts the 
client’s responses, even if the client gets defensive or uncomfort-
able. Giving clients a judgment-free space to process the coaching 
observations is critical to their progress.
John Dewey may not have been successful at transforming our 
educational systems, but his gift of deﬁning how to grow people’s 
minds can be seen in the actions of trained coaches.
Coaching Isn’t Rah-Rah
Most people I know like the idea of having someone act as a 
sounding board when they feel stuck trying to think through a 
dilemma. Talking about a problem can help people look at how 
their thoughts help or hinder their goal achievement. Tey don’t 
want nonspeciﬁc encouragement. “You can do it” statements feel 
patronizing, especially to the high achiever.
In fact, good coaching isn’t always comfortable. Learning 
often happens in a moment of awkward uncertainty—when we 
come to doubt the beliefs and assumptions that underlie our 
choices. Dewey also acknowledged the discomfort that accom-
panies doubt as inherent in the process of learning. A surprising 

COACH THE PERSON, NOT THE PROBLEM
14
fact, disruptive reﬂection, or incisive question is needed to break 
down what we think we know. Ten, we are open to learning. Te 
breakdown doesn’t always feel good. Yet over time, we usually are 
grateful for the insights we gain.
For example, I had a boss who had this uncanny ability to 
read me. He knew what drove me, what I desperately wanted, 
and what barriers my own brain created that got in my way. His 
questions broke through the walls in my mind so I could see my 
blind spots. My realizations were often painful, but I knew what 
I had to do diﬀerently.
Once, when I was on a rampage about the incompetency of 
my peers and the overload of work I then had to do, he said, “It 
seems that everyone disappoints you.” As I paused to think about 
his observation, he added, “Will anyone ever be good enough for 
you?” Tere was nothing left for me to say.
Back at my desk, I wondered if I had always focused on other 
people’s ﬂaws. I saw how this pattern had hurt my personal rela-
tionships for years. With one reﬂection plus one question, he 
made me face how I was playing out this pattern at work. I would 
never see my work relationships the same again.
His observation and question made me stop and question my 
thinking, which was terribly uncomfortable. In the midst of this 
discomfort, I became more conscious of how I distanced myself 
from others by my need to prove I was better than them. I wanted 
to be a leader. Instead, I was a complainer. Te painful truth led 
me to learn how I could better work with others and, someday, 
lead them.
Te best coaches make us recognize we have gaps in our rea-
soning. Te moment we become unsure of what we know, learn-
ing happens. Tis is good coaching.

What Is a Coaching Conversation?
15
Even if all clients need from you in the moment is to be a 
sounding board as they sort through their thoughts, we can still 
use curiosity to partner with them to see themselves and the 
world in a broader way. Coaches facilitate this process in the way 
that Dewey imagined was possible.
We’ve Drifted Away from the Intention  
of Coaching
My second master’s degree is in adult learning/instructional 
design. I’ll never forget a professor saying we should always tell 
students what they would be tested on so they could focus their 
learning. As a student, I loved this advice. My hope was to get 
an A in the class. I wasn’t considering how I would apply what I 
learned when I graduated. I just wanted to learn enough to be an 
A student.
I still believe you should test what you teach, but a growing 
number of students in coach training programs worldwide are 
demanding to learn speciﬁc coaching steps to earn their creden-
tials. Te focus of learning has shifted to the test and away from 
the client relationship. ICF eﬀorts to legitimize coaching by mak-
ing it data-driven often overshadow the intention of coaching. 
Taking an evidence-based approach to limit assessor subjectivity 
is important, and behavioral descriptions are useful for trainers 
and mentors, but transferring speciﬁc requirements to students 
has contributed to thinking of coaching as a formulaic process. 
In attempts to make coaching memorable, the heart of coaching 
is disappearing.
Te identiﬁed coaching competencies were never intended 
to be a checklist of behaviors. I was a part of the ICF leader-
ship when the competencies were written. Te focus was on 

COACH THE PERSON, NOT THE PROBLEM
16
the transformational experience where people learned from the 
inside out. Te competencies weren’t meant to be taken in any 
order other than the beginning and ending—to determine where 
the conversation is going and then to close it out with a com-
mitment. Te remaining competencies reﬂected how present 
coaches are with their clients. Coaches need to fully receive what 
their clients say and express with no judgment. Ten they could 
competently be curious about intentions and meaning. Tere 
isn’t one right way to coach; coaching is a spontaneous process 
between the coach and client.
Coaching competencies provide the framework 
to facilitate self-discovery. They are not a check-
list of required statements and questions.
Te early ICF leaders committed to building the coaching 
profession because of the positive impact we believed coaching 
would make in the world. Te emphasis was on establishing a 
safe and caring relationship between coach and client so people 
felt seen and valued. Ten, once agreement was reached on the 
outcome they would attempt to achieve, the conversation ﬂowed 
naturally from the coach’s curiosity. Te coach was not recalling 
memorized lists, models, and formulas. I am happy to see that 
the 2020 updated ICF competencies better reﬂect the aspirations 
of the founding members.
Coaching is more than reﬂecting and asking questions. Coaches 
must create a bond of trust that deepens over time. Te relation-
ship is essential for the coach to be an eﬀective thinking partner. 
Te courage, care, and curiosity coaches feel, and the belief they 
have in their clients’ potential, make the competencies work.

What Is a Coaching Conversation?
17
During my ﬁrst class at my coaching school, the founder, 
Tomas Leonard, said we can learn how to coach only by get-
ting out there and coaching people. We resisted, saying we didn’t 
know what to do. He said we would learn enough to start coach-
ing after the ﬁrst class, and then we should “just go love them.”
I have used this advice for over twenty years. Most times, I 
feel my clients love me back.
I want to bring the heart as well as the art of coaching into 
all of our conversations about coaching. I wrote this book to be 
a guide for all people who use coaching, regardless of the school 
they attend, the credential they earn, and the role they play.
Although part II provides practices that will ensure coach-
ing eﬀectiveness, the mental habits in part III are essential for 
establishing the relationship that makes coaching so powerful. 
You won’t ﬁnd lists of what you should ask and say. You will 
discover how you can expand people’s capacity to learn and grow 
together in our complex, uncertain world. I honor you for choos-
ing this journey.

About the Author
Marcia Reynolds, PsyD, Master Certified Coach
   take to inﬂu-
ence others to change their lives 
for the better? Tat is the ques-
tion Dr. Marcia Reynolds has 
been asking for three decades. 
She knew telling people what is 
best for them doesn’t work, even 
though she turned her life around 
before nearly destroying it as a 
teenager. She found her answer 
when she discovered coaching. She has since devoted her work 
to understanding the science of coaching—why it is so powerful 
in shifting people’s minds and behaviors and what the best ways 
are to eﬀectively coach. She is passionate about teaching what 
she learns to coaches and leaders around the world. She knows 
coaching can bring people together in a respectful, caring way 
that makes our world a better place to live in for all.
As president of Covisioning LLC, Marcia coaches executives 
and teaches coaching skills to students and leaders, working in 
forty-one countries to date. She also consults with change agents 
who want to establish coaching cultures in their organizations. 
She is a frequent speaker at conferences and has presented at the 
Harvard Kennedy School and Cornell University as well as uni-
versities in Europe and Asia.

Marcia is a pioneer in the coaching profession. She was the 
ffth global president of the International Coach Federation 
(which became the International Coaching Federation in 
2020) and was recently inducted into its Circle of Distinction 
for her many years of service to the global coaching commu-
nity. Currently, she is the training director for the Healthcare 
Coaching Institute and is also on the faculty for the International 
Coaching Academy in Russia and Create China Coaching in 
China. She also teaches coaching skills classes in organizations 
around the world. She is recognized by Global Gurus as one of 
the top fve coaches in the world.
Before she launched her own business, her greatest success 
came from designing the employee development program for a 
global semiconductor company facing bankruptcy. Within three 
years, the company turned around and became the number one 
stock market success in 1993.
Interviews and excerpts from her books The Discomfort Zone: 
How Leaders Turn Difficult Conversations into Breakthroughs; 
Outsmart Your Brain: How to Master Your Mind When Emotions 
Take the Wheel; and Wander Woman: How High-Achieving Women 
Find Contentment and Direction have appeared in many places, 
including Fast Company, Forbes.com, CNN.com, Psychology 
Today, the Globe and Mail, and the Wall Street Journal, and she has 
appeared in business magazines in Europe and Asia and on ABC 
World News.
Marcia is passionate about evoking transformation with 
coaching. Email or call her if you or others in your organization 
have a need that coaching can meet or you want to teach your 
leaders 
or 
coaches 
to 
have 
more 
transformational 
conversations: Marcia@covisioning.com or +1-602-954-9030. 
Her website is https://covisioning.com/.

ORDER 
YOUR 
COPY 
TODAY!
SPECI
AL 
OFFERS!
FREE 
BONUS 
MATERI
ALS
Get FREE bonus materials such as 
12 Coaching Tools to Coach the 
Person, Not the Problem ebook, 
webinars, and discussion guides 
when you purchase quantities of 1, 
5, or 25. 
Quantities of 100 and 250 get 
Quantities of 100 and 250 get 
exclusive webinars or a live 6-hour 
class and more!
SHARE
SEE 
FULL 
DETAI
LS
SPECI
AL 
DI
SCOUNTS
If you are interested in ordering 20+ 
copies, you are eligible for a 
discounted price. 
Email Marcia@Covisioning.com to 
find out more.
EMAI
L 
MARCI
A
AVAI
LABLE 
AT 
THESE 
RETAI
LERS:
