

More praise for The Discomfort Zone
“Marcia Reynolds gives leaders the tools they need to go beyond basic 
coaching. Both provocative and practical, she lays out a framework 
for getting to the heart of the matter in conversations and includes 
vibrant case studies to ensure you apply what you learn.”
—Jennifer B. Kahnweiler, PhD, author of Quiet Inﬂ uence
“This book leaves leaders and coaches no excuse for avoiding difﬁ cult is-
sues. It’s time we all go beyond our comfort zones to do our best work.” 
—Prof. Konstantin Korotov, PhD, Director, Center for Leadership 
Development Research, European School of Management and 
Technology, Berlin, Germany
“The Discomfort Zone presents valuable techniques to harness friction, 
break down limiting perspectives, and create shifts in thinking. I learned 
how to constructively challenge my team by expanding their minds and 
facilitating growth. You won’t seek being comfortable again!”
—Bettina Hein, founder and CEO, Pixability
“In The Discomfort Zone, Marcia Reynolds clearly describes how lead-
ers can be most effective in communicating and coaching their teams 
to greater success even in the most stressful situations.”
—Victor F. Trastek, MD, Emeritus CEO, Mayo Clinic in Arizona, and 
Associate Director, Professionalism and Leadership, Mayo Clinic 
“They say leaders make lemonade out of lemons; with The Discomfort 
Zone, you can turn conﬂ ict into career wins!”
—Jeffrey Hayzlett, show host, Bloomberg TV; bestselling author of The 
Mirror Test and Running the Gauntlet; and sometime cowboy
“Marcia Reynolds shows us that it is time to quit diffusing difﬁ cult 
conversations and embrace them. She guides us to use our head, 
heart, and gut to create the learning and growth needed to foster an 
innovative environment with engaged employees.”
—Betty-Ann Heggie, former Senior Vice President, Potash Corporation, 
and member of Canada’s Top 100 Most Powerful Women Hall of Fame
“No one has approached leadership conversations like this author. 
She gives her reader a clear path to progress. Don’t just read and nod 
at the ideas here; put them to work immediately.”
—Beverly Kaye, founder of Career Systems International and bestselling 
coauthor of Love ’Em or Lose ’Em

“This supremely practical book will guide you to help others move 
beyond their resistance. As you develop the conﬁ dence to embrace 
challenging interactions you’ll liberate tremendous creative energy 
and become a more effective leader at work and at home.”
—Michael J. Gelb, bestselling author of How to Think Like Leonardo da 
Vinci and Creativity on Demand 
“Dr. Reynolds helps us go beyond just ‘getting through’ difﬁ cult con-
versations. A master coach, she synthesizes the deepest wisdom 
from neuroscience and leadership to give us something really useful. 
This will be my new go-to guide for leaders.”
—Madeleine Homan Blanchard, cofounder of Coaching Services and 
CD2 Leadership, The Ken Blanchard Companies
“Marcia Reynolds shows how the ‘discomfort zone’ provides the fast- 
est path for helping others fulﬁ ll their potential. Her brilliant book is a 
guide for leaders at all levels to make a real difference.” 
—Jesse Lyn Stoner, coauthor of Full Steam Ahead!
“Marcia Reynolds reveals the thought processes and techniques used by 
masterful coaches to engage others in transformational conversations. 
If you’re looking to take your coaching capabilities to the next level, The 
Discomfort Zone will prove an insightful and invaluable guide.”
—Dianna Anderson, CEO, Cylient, and coauthor of Coaching That Counts
“The Discomfort Zone provides solid practices for making challenging 
conversations a powerful tool for helping others learn, perform, and 
excel.”
—Chip R. Bell, coauthor of Managers as Mentors
“It’s crazy-making for leaders when they can’t communicate with their 
people. They need to enter the discomfort zone where real connections 
take place, creating the possibility for breakthrough conversations.”
—Darelyn “DJ” Mitsch, President, Pyramid Resource Group, and author 
of Team Advantage and Zombies to Zealots

The Discomfort Zone

This page intentionally left blank 

The Discomfort Zone
How Leaders Turn 
Difficult Conversations 
into Breakthroughs
Marcia Reynolds

The Discomfort Zone
Copyright © 2014 by Marcia Reynolds
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distrib-
uted, or transmitted in any form or by any means, including photocopying,
recording, or other electronic or mechanical methods, without the prior writ-
ten permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations
embodied in critical reviews and certain other noncommercial uses permitted
by copyright law. For permission requests, write to the publisher, addressed
“Attention: Permissions Coordinator,” at the address below.
Berrett-Koehler Publishers, Inc.
235 Montgomery Street, Suite 650
San Francisco, California 94104-2916
Tel: (415) 288-0260, Fax: (415) 362-2512
www.bkconnection.com
Ordering information for print editions
Quantity sales. Special discounts are available on quantity purchases by cor-
porations, associations, and others. For details, contact the “Special Sales
Department” at the Berrett-Koehler address above.
Individual sales. Berrett-Koehler publications are available through most
bookstores. They can also be ordered directly from Berrett-Koehler: Tel:
(800) 929-2929; Fax: (802) 864-7626; www.bkconnection.com
Orders for college textbook/course adoption use. Please contact Berrett-
Koehler: Tel: (800) 929-2929; Fax: (802) 864-7626.
Orders by U.S. trade bookstores and wholesalers. Please contact Ingram
Publisher Services, Tel: (800) 509-4887; Fax: (800) 838-1149; E-mail:
customer .service@ingram publisher services .com; or visit  www .ingram
publisher services .com/ Ordering for details about electronic ordering.
Berrett-Koehler and the BK logo are registered trademarks of Berrett-Koehler
Publishers, Inc.
First Edition
Paperback print edition ISBN 978-1-62656-065-9
PDF e-book ISBN 978-1-62656-066-6
IDPF e-book ISBN 978-1-62656-067-3
2014-1
Interior design and project management: Dovetail Publishing Services
Cover design: Wes Youssi, M.80 Design
Author photo (page 163): Tina Celle

Contents
	Introduction	
What Is Good about Discomfort?
1
	
One	
Criteria for Choosing a Discomfort Zone 
Conversation
9
	
Two	
What Comes First
25
	
Three	
The Map and the Milestones for 
Your Conversation
45
	
Four	
How to Listen for What to Say
67
	
Five	
New Perspective—Using Discomfort Zone 
Conversations to Break Through Barriers 87
	
Six	
Transformation—Using Discomfort Zone 
Conversations to Embrace What’s Next
111
	
Seven	
Strategizing Your Development Plan
135
	
	
Notes
147
	
	
Acknowledgments
155
	
	
Index
157
	
	
About the Author
163

This page intentionally left blank 

1
Introduction
What Is Good about 
Discomfort?
The Discomfort Zone is the moment of uncertainty 
when people are most open to learning.
O
n the day I resigned from my last corporate position, one 
of the vice presidents came into my office and said, “You 
can’t go. Who will I talk to?” I recalled our first heated encoun­
ter five years earlier when he was the head of quality and I was 
the touchy-feely new girl hired to make the employees feel better 
about the changes that were happening in the organization. We 
were aliens from two different worlds. Yet together, we created a 
program that seeded the cultural transformation that helped the 
organization become the top performing IPO (initial public offer­
ing) in the United States in 1993.
There were many conversations in which I challenged his 
beliefs about what motivates people, questioned his views on 
leadership, dug into the source of his emotions when he no 
longer wanted to put up with me, and helped him see that 
letting go of some of his habits and perspectives would help 

2
The Discomfort Zone
him achieve what he knew was possible for the company. At 
times, he didn’t like me, but he came to trust me, even when 
I was wrong. I learned a lot, too, about the business and what 
it takes to transform both one leader and an organization. We 
both became surprisingly comfortable with uncomfortable 
conversations.
His remorse over losing our regular conversations inspired 
me to be formally trained as a coach. I also pursued a degree in 
organizational psychology so I could codify and improve what I 
found works in coaching to shift someone’s viewpoint when the 
conversation feels difficult. I have been coached by masters when 
I had my defenses broken down with one statement and had to 
wait for my brain to reorganize and make sense of the new per­
spective. I have taught and mentored leaders around the world 
to use the skills for themselves to create breakthrough moments 
in their conversations. I found that leaders who master the skills 
of helping others think through their blind spots, attachments, 
and resistance are not only effective, but they are also the most 
remembered and revered.
In the book Synchronicity, Joseph Jaworski said the most suc­
cessful leaders are those who participate in helping others create 
new realities.1 The leader engages in conversations that bring to 
light a person’s filters and frames. When the factors that frame 
the meaning of a situation are revealed, the view of what is true 
changes and becomes clear.
A change in the view of what is true is needed for long-lasting 
and positive change. To do this, you have to be comfortable with 
disruption and tension in a conversation, creating a Discomfort 
Zone in which new ideas are birthed. A leader who uses the Dis­
comfort Zone emphasizes potential rather than problems.

3
What Is Good about Discomfort?
What Is the Discomfort Zone?
In order to define who we are and make sense of the world 
around us, our brains develop constructs and rules that we 
strongly protect without much thought. Neuroscientist Michael 
Gazzaniga says we get stuck in our automatic thought-processing 
and fool ourselves into thinking we are acting consciously and 
willfully.2 “Our conscious awareness is the mere tip of the ice­
berg of nonconscious processing,” Gazzaniga says.3 When some­
one asks you why you did something, you immediately come up 
with an ad hoc answer that fits the situation even if the response 
doesn’t make complete sense. These quick interpretations actu­
ally constrain the brain, making human beings narrow-minded 
by nature.
To help people think differently, you have to disturb the 
automatic processing.4 This is best done by challenging the 
beliefs that created the frames and surfacing the underlying 
fears, needs, and desires that are keeping the constructs in place. 
There needs to be a hole in the force field that protects their sense 
of reality before they will actively explore, examine, and change 
their beliefs and behavior.
People need to be aroused by surprising statements about 
their behavior and by questions that make them stop and think 
about what they are saying. If you break through their mental 
frames, they will stare at you for a moment as their brains look 
for ways to make sense of what they are considering. Then a 
burst of adrenaline could cause an emotional reaction, anything 
from nervous laughter to anger before an insight emerges. If you 
act on this moment by helping to solidify the new awareness, 
their minds will change. If you do not facilitate this process, a 
strong ego may work backward to justify the previous behavior.5

4
The Discomfort Zone
The Discomfort Zone is the moment of uncertainty when 
people are most open to learning. An emotional reaction occurs 
at this moment indicating a chance for the person to develop 
a new perspective, see a different solution to the problem, and 
potentially grow as a person. Joshua Fields Millburn and Ryan 
Nicodemus, authors of Minimalism: Live a Meaningful Life, define 
this moment as feeling temporarily naked. “Because when you’re 
naked, you’re most vulnerable. And when you’re vulnerable, 
that’s when radical growth happens.”6
Because emotions are involved, the discomfort can be felt by 
both people in the conversation. The leader or coach’s discomfort 
is secondary to the process, however, and might not even exist 
with practice. For true shifts in thinking and behavior to occur, 
you must be willing to challenge a person’s beliefs, interrupt his 
patterns, and short-circuit the conviction to his logic even when 
it feels uncomfortable. This is a Discomfort Zone conversation.
There is a range of possible reactions when you do this. The 
realization could be minimal, with the person responding, “Oh, 
yeah, I see what you mean.” On the other end of the spectrum, 
a person could gasp with embarrassment and then beg for time 
to think about what occurred, especially if previous behavior 
has been destructive and he or she did not recognize the impact 
until that moment. Many times people will laugh at themselves; 
they might even get angry when it is difficult for them to accept 
the truth.
Consider your own experiences. The sudden, new, and amaz­
ing solution to a problem probably didn’t come to you as you hov­
ered over your desk rearranging the details. The truth about your 
future didn’t appear to you as you sat in the dark ruminating over 
past conversations. Profound changes to your personal and profes­
sional life weren’t caused by a self-generated flash of insight. The 
sudden solution, amazing truth, and profound understanding that 

5
What Is Good about Discomfort?
gave you no choice but to change your mind most likely came as 
a result of a disruptive question and deep reflection initiated by 
someone else.
For the same reason you can’t tickle yourself, you can’t fully 
explore your own thoughts. Your brain will block and desensitize 
you to self-imposed exploration. When someone you trust adeptly 
challenges your reasoning and asks you the powerful question 
that breaks down your protective frame, your brain is forced to 
reorder data in your long-term memory. For a moment, the break­
down feels awkward. You might feel a pinch of anger or sadness, 
but then you are just as likely to laugh at what you see . . . after you 
gasp. There must be an emotional stake in the game for restruc­
turing to occur.
This book first shows how you set the foundation. There 
must be a level of trust and safety so the person will not think 
you are being manipulative. Then it will show how to use posi­
tive confrontation, honest feedback, and frame-shattering ques­
tions to spark activity in the brain causing changes in perception, 
self-image, and behavior. The reward goes beyond getting good 
results to experiencing deep fulfillment when you witness the 
human before you make this mind-altering shift.
The Best Times to Have a Discomfort 
Zone Conversation
Picture yourself sitting in a conversation with a woman you 
know is smart and committed to her work, but she is complain­
ing about a situation and feels stuck with no solution and she is 
resisting the changes others have told her to make. Maybe you 
are wondering why she can’t see what’s best for her. You want her 
to quit focusing on the problem. You want her to try something 

6
The Discomfort Zone
new. You want her to move on. You’ve given her feedback. She 
discounts your view. You’ve suggested solutions but the conver­
sation just circles back to what is not working. This is a perfect 
time for a Discomfort Zone conversation!
You can also use these skills to engage and retain your top 
talent. A bad economy can mask employee dissatisfaction. As 
soon as the economy shows some stability, people begin to look 
elsewhere for jobs, especially the high achievers. They spend a 
good portion of their attention and time looking for their next 
opportunity, maybe with a competitor.
When economies thrive, employee engagement is critical 
to retain top talent and meet increasing demand for production 
and innovation. I remember how successful headhunters were 
in the booming 90s when we were losing our top engineers to 
the better paying companies down the street. Fortunately, many 
returned when they realized the culture down the street was not 
as caring and inspiring as we were working to create.
A good way of retaining top talent is to listen to them, trust 
they can figure things out, and provide development opportu­
nities, which include expanding their minds as well as their 
skills. A survey published in Harvard Business Review found that 
although young high achievers were given high-visibility jobs 
and increasing responsibilities, they were dissatisfied with the 
lack of mentoring and coaching they received.7 There seems to 
be a gap in what management thinks and what employees want, 
indicating that leaders aren’t listening.
Clearly, leaders need to spend more time with their top tal­
ent, helping them think through problems, see situations more 
strategically, and grow beyond their limitations. The Discomfort 
Zone will give you these skills.

7
What Is Good about Discomfort?
What You Will Get from Reading This Book
In this book the word leader will apply to anyone engaged in a 
conversation who is focused on expanding the awareness of a 
person or group of people. You may be a leader, change agent, 
colleague, inside coach, outside coach, or consultant.
The word person will apply to the human you are speaking 
with no matter the nature of the relationship. When engaging 
in these conversations, perception of status should not get in 
the way. The person you are with is not a protégé, direct report, 
or student. He or she must feel you are an equal partner in the 
journey. How to ensure that someone feels your respect will be 
explored in Chapter Two.
Chapter One will look at how The Discomfort Zone is differ­
ent from other conversation and coaching techniques and when 
these conversations are most useful. The techniques aren’t a 
cure-all for every dilemma because certain criteria must be met 
to have the intended effect. Chapter One will explore what con­
ditions are necessary to support a successful outcome.
When you begin your conversation, there are necessary 
steps you must take to establish trust and positive intention so 
when you provoke discomfort, both short- and long-term results 
are constructive. Chapter Two gives guidelines for creating this 
safety bubble to effectively use the Discomfort Zone.
Chapters Three and Four describe the steps and provide 
examples for giving honest feedback, using reflective and infor­
mative statements, and asking powerful questions to break down 
barriers and broaden awareness. The skill development includes 
methods for observing your internal processing and protection 
systems as well as hearing these systems operate in others. You 
will learn how to listen from the three processing centers of your 

8
The Discomfort Zone
neural network—your head, heart, and gut—while staying pres­
ent to the person you are with.
Chapters Five and Six bring together the approaches 
explained in case studies so you can better implement what you 
have read. Chapter Five looks at how to break through well-
established defense routines that are keeping people from mak­
ing changes or handling situations in the most productive way. 
Chapter Six explores cases in which the leader helped people 
work through blocks to realize more potent ways to apply their 
strengths and passion.
Chapter Seven is designed to support you as you implement 
the skills. It will provide resources and practices that will help 
you feel both comfortable and competent when having Dis­
comfort Zone conversations. You will also find ways for finding 
and creating communities where you can share cases, practice 
together, and build on the insights this book offers.
Effective leaders help others think more broadly for themselves. 
The more leaders can get the neurons sparking, the greater the 
chance for innovation, unexpected achievement, and the con­
tinuous desire to grow. On the practical side, you will see more 
engagement and retention, positively impacting the bottom-line 
results. On the human side, the outcome is more fulfilling, for 
you, too, as you come to appreciate the power of these conversa­
tions. The Discomfort Zone will give you the means for creating 
provocative conversations in which you, those you work with, 
and possibly your entire organization will experience a brave, 
new workplace built on unbridled curiosity.

9
Chapter One
Criteria for Choosing 
a Discomfort Zone 
Conversation
“The function of leadership is to produce more 
leaders, not more followers.”
Ralph Nader, from Crashing the Party
I
was sharing my latest complaints about my peers with my
 boss when he suddenly sighed so loudly I stopped mid-
sentence. When he had my attention, he said, “I know you work 
hard. I know you want the best for the company, but everybody 
seems to let you down. Is anyone ever good enough for you?”
I sat paralyzed for a dreadfully long time. When I finally 
exhaled, the tension rolled down my shoulders resting heavily 
in my legs. I felt both embarrassed and amazed. My coach had 
once made a similar observation after my rant about my dating 
fiascos. Here was my wall of protection showing up again at work. 
All I could say was, “Of course. You’re right.” I knew I would 
never see my work relationships the same again.
The question my boss asked me led me to recognize a pat­
tern of behavior that kept me from fully engaging with my team 
members to resolve problems. I am a high achiever. I did good 

10
The Discomfort Zone
work on my own and felt snubbed the moment I wasn’t recog­
nized for my accomplishments or grand ideas. To ease the pain, 
I found reasons to complain about how others were not living 
up to their promises or expectations. Instead of learning how I 
could influence more effectively or realize even grander results 
with others, I focused on highlighting their flaws.
Whether my boss knew all of this or not, he had asked me 
the perfect question that disrupted my pattern of thinking and 
forced me to reflect on what I was saying. If he had told me what 
I was doing instead of asking the question, I would have resisted 
his allegation. No matter how clear and targeted were his com­
ments, his words of wisdom and advice would have hit the auto­
matic reject button in my brain.
It wasn’t just the powerful question that had such a profound 
effect on me. His timing was impeccable. I felt he heard me. He 
was responding to my story, not practicing a technique. I was 
amazed, uncomfortable, and a bit embarrassed but I didn’t feel 
judged. He had masterfully moved me into the Discomfort Zone. 
My sense of who I thought I was changed forever.
I share this example to help clarify what using the Discomfort 
Zone is in practice and, more importantly, what it is not. Using the 
Discomfort Zone is not the same as initiating a challenging con­
versation. The process is based on a specific type of coaching most 
useful when it is clear that a shift in perception and self-awareness 
would be helpful to the person you are with as he or she stumbles 
through a perplexing situation. You choose the Discomfort Zone 
when you want to assist others in thinking differently.
Not Another Conversation Book
You may have read one or many of the books teaching how to hold 
challenging, courageous, fierce, crucial, real, and authentic conver­
sations. You may have a favorite; mine is Authentic Conversations.1 

11
Criteria for Choosing a Discomfort Zone Conversation
These books are important. They teach leaders how to better 
approach a conversation about difficult issues they need to address.
These conversation books focus on the speaker. They provide 
direction on how a person can best deliver a message and achieve 
an outcome for themselves. There might be a mutual benefit, but 
the primary target is helping the person who speaks first.
This is where The Discomfort Zone differs. The focus shifts to 
the receiver, the person you are speaking with. You don’t have a 
message to deliver; you desire someone to expand his awareness 
to see his situation and himself in a different light. You don’t tell 
him what you want. You want him to discover, create, or unveil 
this new reality on his own. In short, you want him to think for 
himself. You are the facilitator of this process.
You might be thinking, Why bother? Most corporations honor 
those with a no-nonsense, frank, get-to-the-point approach. 
The leader who is respectful yet firm keeps the engines run­
ning. Straight talk and efficiency are requisites in a competitive 
marketplace.
Yes, using direct, candid talk can alleviate inefficiencies, 
hold people accountable for their goals, and align people around 
clear expectations. There may be negative reactions, but the sting 
is brief if they see value in the solution and in their contribution. 
As the authors say in the book Crucial Conversations, the goal is 
to “Be persuasive, not abrasive.”2 There are times you will choose 
to have these types of conversations.
Even when done well, though, when the focus of a 
conversation is on what the leader wants, a breakthrough in 
perception won’t be achieved. The receiver might agree. Problem 
solving might be satisfactory. Incremental shifts in behavior 
might occur, but the opportunity to cause a mind-changing 
tilt in perception that allows the person to see a situation in an 
entirely new light is lost. If, as Ralph Nader said, “The function of 

12
The Discomfort Zone
leadership is to produce more leaders,”3 then any conversation that 
starts with the leader declaring the way forward misses the mark.
If instead you believe the person you are with is capable of 
seeing things differently and finding new solutions with a little 
help thinking it through, you are likely to get better results if 
you act more as a “thinking partner” than a holder of the truth. 
You may want the person to change his point of view, but you 
facilitate the shifts in thinking through questions and reflective 
statements instead of by telling him your desires and opinions. 
You may feel you have less control in these conversations—at 
least until you become more comfortable with the process—but 
the outcomes are worth the effort.
How This Approach Differs from Traditional 
Leadership Coaching Techniques
Coaching has become a recognized leadership skill over the past 
decade. Leaders who coach are more adept at triggering people’s 
imagination and creative thinking skills. Using an inquiry 
approach has proven to engage people more fully at physical, 
mental, and emotional levels. However, much of the coach train­
ing for leaders falls short of producing breakthrough results.
Traditionally, coach training for leaders teaches how to be 
supportive, encouraging, inquisitive, and nonjudgmental. Most 
approaches are appreciative, helping people build on their 
strengths instead of focusing on their weaknesses. Solutions are 
often creative. People feel heartened instead of defeated.
These approaches are useful but often not enough when 
dealing with bright, ambitious people with disparate, strong 
opinions.4 Challenging assumptions and raising uncomfortable 
questions promote critical thinking. Discomfort Zone conver­-

13
Criteria for Choosing a Discomfort Zone Conversation
sations start by building trust and rapport, but then the 
conversations go deeper to create the possibility for a 
breakthrough in thinking.
Most strong-willed people respect someone who stands up to 
their resistance, and then asks them the questions that provoke 
them to scrutinize what they do. In a recent interview, world-
renowned coach Sir John Whitmore said, “I think that was how 
it was when coaching began, being gentle and supportive. But I 
think under today’s circumstances this is changing.”
Many leaders and coaches are not trained or courageous 
enough to use discomfort to create breakthroughs. Whitmore 
added, “I personally like being challenged. I have a couple of 
coaches who coach with a scalpel and I love it.” To break through 
the barriers and address protective thinking habits, you must 
be willing to hold a balance of pressure and care in the conver­
sation. You can’t avoid challenge if you want people to see the 
world around them in a revolutionary way.”
Also, many leaders and coaches are trained to quickly shift 
the person from feeling negative to positive, going away from 
the problem to what is possible. If this happens early in the con­
versation, the person might feel ashamed for continuing to feel 
angry or frustrated during or after the conversation. His or her 
real needs remain unspoken.
When working with the Discomfort Zone, you may trigger 
negative emotions, which is a good sign. When a person realizes 
she has blocked a truth that was in her face the entire time, she 
may feel mortified, angry, or sad. As explained in the Introduc­
tion, these emotions indicate learning is occurring. You have 
broken through a protective barrier in the brain. The person is 
finally confronting her rationalizations or seeing her blind spots. 
Because of this, a clearer and broader understanding of the situ­
ation can emerge.

14
The Discomfort Zone
The goal is to break through a person’s guise of knowing. 
When people face a surprising revelation about their behavior, 
they will pause and then react. Malcolm Gladwell quoted 
psychologist Joshua Aronson in Blink saying, “People are 
ignorant of the things that affect their action, yet they rarely 
feel ignorant.”5 The reaction to bringing these things to light 
will register somewhere between slight discomfort and an 
emotional outpour. These reactions indicate their mental 
frames are restructuring, clearing the way for people to see 
what is truly driving their behavior when they couldn’t see 
this before. Creating this discomfort gives people a chance 
to evaluate their experiences.6 The truth can hurt or at least 
surprise before it sets people free.
Using the Discomfort Zone teaches leadership coaching 
methods that include the means to create trust as well as the 
ability to challenge and expand a person’s thinking. In the pro­
cess, the leader remains nonjudgmental and caring so the person 
feels safe enough to express a range of emotions as his or her 
brain recognizes something unexpected. This is how leaders cre­
ate learning environments that improve productivity, innovation, 
and leadership bench strength.
Timing and Purpose
There are times when the methods taught in this book may be 
inappropriate for a specific situation. The best times to employ 
the techniques are when the person is having interpersonal/
communications issues or motivational blocks and when you are 
helping someone develop decision-making and leadership capa­
bilities. Even in these scenarios, specific circumstances must be 
present to have the intended effect.

15
Criteria for Choosing a Discomfort Zone Conversation
The Right Time to Choose 
the Discomfort Zone
A common leadership misperception is if someone isn’t perform­
ing well, he doesn’t know what he is doing and needs to be told 
what action to take. Nothing is more annoying than being told 
how to do something you already know. If you have been doing 
this to someone, you may be the source of his dwindling motiva­
tion. The choice to tell, teach, or advise someone should not be 
taken lightly.
Seek to discover what he already knows and is capable of 
doing. Then if you both determine company or project knowl­
edge is needed, you can share what you know or provide 
resources. If skills are wanting, you can pinpoint what specific 
training will help.
Most likely, the competent person you are speaking to 
doesn’t need knowledge or training; he needs your support in 
expanding his view around an issue and in understanding the 
impact of his behavior and decisions. These needs are the perfect 
criteria for using the Discomfort Zone. Start by understanding 
what he knows and then seek to discover what gap in perception 
or emotional block is keeping him from seeing a plausible solu­
tion. When the person has sufficient skills and knowledge, you 
will be more successful when you energize him using what he 
knows than to exhaust him with what you know.
Your Belief in the Person’s Potential
The conversation must be based on your belief in the person’s 
potential to grow. Ask yourself the following question: “Is it 
more important that the conversation is about discovering how 
he or she is able to work best or that I steer the ship so goals 
are achieved?” If you believe in the latter, it is more likely people 

16
The Discomfort Zone
will wait and see what you decide than take the risk to think 
for themselves with you. You will achieve a greater payoff when 
people see you as a leader who authentically cares about them 
more than when you are acting as the organizational fixer.
To trust you enough to work with you inside the Discomfort 
Zone, people have to feel you believe in them possibly even 
more than they believe in themselves. They know you are 
dedicated to seeing them succeed. You sense their hopes and 
dreams, their desire to grow, and possibly, their yearning 
to connect to a higher purpose.7 If the times you help people 
move closer to their aspirations is what inspires you to come to 
work and be a leader, you will enjoy working with them in the 
Discomfort Zone.
To be successful with this stance, you must be willing to 
develop your capacity for self-observation, including recognizing 
in the moment or soon after when you have judged and limited 
a person’s growth. Trust is a major component for using the 
Discomfort Zone successfully. Do ongoing work on recognizing 
the impact you have on others, especially when you are upset or 
frustrated. It will also help to increase your willingness to admit 
your human fallibilities. People feel better when they know their 
leader or coach makes mistakes, too.
Your Willingness to Seek Out
These Opportunities
Many leaders operate with the assumption that if people want 
something they will ask for it. This belief is not true for many 
reasons, including cultural views on approaching authority and 
the negative implication ascribed to asking for help. You will 
miss opportunities to develop people if you don’t reach out to 
them. Check to see if you believe in any of these myths.

17
Criteria for Choosing a Discomfort Zone Conversation
Myth 1
My employees don’t want me to ask 
questions. They just want me to give them 
answers so they can get back to work.
This is a myth of convenience. If you prefer not to spend the 
time on development conversations and fear challenging people 
to think differently, you will tell this story. But people enjoy 
learning and improving more than they like being dependent on 
you. According to the research compiled by Daniel Pink, two of 
the three major motivators of high performance are autonomy 
and mastery.8 If you want continuous great results, you need to 
continuously expand their minds.
Myth 2
If they need something from me or don’t 
understand something, they will ask.
No matter what your title is, people might not feel comfortable 
letting you know they can’t figure something out. They might 
have a history of other bosses, parents, and teachers belittling 
them for not knowing everything. People appreciate you ask­
ing, “What would be the best thing I could do to support you 
right now?” If they can’t think of anything specifically, offer the 
gift of your time. A private conversation could reveal an oppor­
tunity to expand their thinking.
Myth 3
No one is complaining, so everything is fine.
You may be a good leader but you aren’t perfect. Leaders who 
don’t spend time sitting with their people and asking questions 
about how things are going are out of touch with the challenges 
their people face. When you keep your fingers on the pulse of 
your team by asking about their challenges, opinions, and con­
cerns, you will know what they need to maintain motivation.

18
The Discomfort Zone
Myth 4
If a good person does something bad, it won’t 
happen again. They will self-correct.
This is the most common rationalization for avoiding what could 
be a difficult conversation. Whether you worry that people won’t 
like you or they will react poorly and you won’t know what to 
do, you need to let people know when their actions have had an 
undesirable outcome. The sooner you share this information, the 
better. Then if you sense resistance, you can transition the con­
versation to embrace a coaching approach.
Myth 5
The best employees want to be 
left alone to do their work.
High achievers want positive feedback. They want recognition 
for their good work. They want a steady stream of interesting 
projects with indicators of success. And they want you to chal­
lenge their thinking so they can continuously grow. Don’t risk 
losing your best people. Use the Discomfort Zone to grow their 
minds on a regular basis.
When you trust in people’s capabilities for learning and 
growth, why wouldn’t you want to help them rise above their 
current proficiency? This should be your highest priority as a 
leader. Look for opportunities for Discomfort Zone conversations 
as a part of your role as a leader.
Your Purpose for a Conversation
in the Discomfort Zone
Before having a Discomfort Zone conversation, explore your 
reasons for having the conversation and be honest about your 
expectations. Have you already decided what the acceptable next 
step will be? You may have a desire to help the person see his 

19
Criteria for Choosing a Discomfort Zone Conversation
work or himself differently, but you can’t be attached to how the 
conversation will progress or what the outcome will be if you 
want to stay in the zone. If you can’t be open to this, you will end 
up forcing the conversation in the direction you want it to go. 
This will undermine the purpose of your discussion. Your pur­
pose is to encourage the other person to think for himself, not to 
tutor, cajole, or influence someone to see your point of view.
Check Your Assumptions
Do you have any preconceived notions about the person that 
could get in the way of trusting her to find her way even if it 
takes some time and lessons learned? If you have some limiting 
assumptions about the person, can you put them aside for the 
time it takes to test the person’s ability to grow? If so, you will 
be able to allow the conversation to twist and turn on its own, 
a necessary condition of using the Discomfort Zone. If not, you 
will limit her growth and possibly damage her confidence, hurt­
ing future conversations about her progress.
Choose Your Emotions
When you think about the person and the situation you want 
to address, do strong emotions arise? Will you be able to release 
these emotions if they surface during the conversation? Can you 
accept that the person responds to challenges differently than 
you do, that his style and speed for processing, learning, and try­
ing out new behaviors are different from yours? Before having a 
conversation in the Discomfort Zone, envision what could hap­
pen, including the worst case scenario. Choose how you want 
to respond. A clear vision acts as a dress rehearsal that will help 
you get through the real thing.
As the leader, you set the emotional tone of the conversa­
tion. You need to hold a positive emotional intention as well as a 
developmental purpose throughout the conversation.

20
The Discomfort Zone
You also need to practice patience during the conversation 
and beyond. The process of sustaining changes in self-perception 
and behavior could take time. The person you are trying to reach 
may decide to move forward but then hit a wall of fear and skep­
ticism and fall back. His natural defenses will kick in against the 
pain of growth. Being there to coach him through the fog of tran­
sition is as important as the initial breakthrough conversation.
Be fascinated by the human in front of you. Don’t let him 
frustrate you with his resistance. Don’t let him fool you with a 
false face of ennui. And definitely, don’t resort to threatening or 
bribing him. He needs you to stay calm and intentional through­
out the conversation.
Their Levels of Willingness, Desire, and Courage
People don’t change because you want them to. They might not 
even change if they want to. Three conditions must be present 
for a person to effectively engage with you in this conversation: 
willingness, desire, and courage. If the person is willing to work 
with you to see things differently, he believes the conversation 
has a payoff he desires, and he has the courage to let go of old 
habits of thinking, there is a good chance the conversation will 
be both successful and meaningful.
Willingness to Talk
You can’t insist someone have an exploratory conversation with 
you and expect it to be fruitful. You need to declare your inten­
tion and then gauge if she is willing to work with you for at least 
part of the process. If she ever feels forced to participate, willing­
ness will dissipate. She will, instead, become compliant, which 
blocks new realizations. Let her know she can call an end to the 
conversation at any time.

21
Criteria for Choosing a Discomfort Zone Conversation
To maintain willingness, always acknowledge the person’s 
perspective as valid even if it varies from yours. Never make her 
feel wrong. If you do not judge her, she may trust you, which is 
necessary to having a successful conversation. If she trusts you 
are holding her best interest throughout the conversation, and 
that you will give her time and space to process the conversation 
in any way that works for her, she will stay with you even when 
the tension is thick.
Desire Based on a Personal Value
Unless there is a payoff based on something the other person truly 
wants, willingness will not endure. There won’t be a breakthrough 
in thinking without some desire for the outcome. You have to con­
sider what this might be before you have the conversation, and then 
be open to discovering that he might have a different desire that 
would inspire the change during the conversation. Never assume 
you know someone too well to ask him what he wants.
Payoffs that inspire change are usually related to some­
thing the person values, including being seen as a leader, being 
respected by peers, mastering skills that make goals easier to 
reach, earning the chance to be given challenging projects and 
adventures, carving out more time with family, and gaining more 
peace of mind. Tying the change to someone’s personal values 
and career dreams will help to ensure long-term results.
The Courage to Look Within
A Discomfort Zone conversation is also a hero’s journey.9 You 
are taking someone on an adventure of self-exploration where 
she may need to battle mental habits. The battle takes courage. 
You need to create a sense of safety before going deep into the 
conversation, and then maintain this sense of safety even when 
you challenge her thoughts for her courage to persist.

22
The Discomfort Zone
There will be times when she will refuse to accept the chal­
lenge. You can’t make people feel courageous. If, however, she 
trusts your intention is for her to improve based on the potential 
you see, you should be able to help her move forward when the 
demons arise. Helping someone muster the courage to say, “Yes!” 
when she feels awkward, afraid, or unhappy is one of the great­
est gifts you can give her.
If you want to make a real difference for someone, I chal­
lenge you to step into the Discomfort Zone. It is an amazing 
process to facilitate. As a side benefit, you will learn more about 
yourself.

23
Criteria for Choosing a Discomfort Zone Conversation
CHAPTER ONE: Key Points to Remember
1.	 Using the Discomfort Zone is not the same as initiating a 
typical challenging conversation. It is a method of coaching 
used when it is clear that a shift in perception or sense of self 
would be helpful to the person. You don’t have a message to 
deliver; you desire someone to expand her awareness to see 
her situation and herself in a different light. You don’t tell her 
what you want; you want her to discover, create, or unveil a 
new reality on her own. In short, you want her to think for 
herself. You are the facilitator of this process.
2.	 This book teaches a style of leadership coaching not widely 
practiced in organizations. It includes how to use challenging 
questions and reflective statements to help a person confront 
his ration­alizations and see his blind spots, leading to changes 
in how he sees himself and his world. This style of coaching 
achieves more profound behavioral changes than other 
approaches.
3.	 The specific circumstances needed for this approach to be 
successful include the right time in the person’s development; 
your belief in the person’s potential; your willingness to seek 
out these conversations; your purpose for the conversation; 
and the person’s levels of willingness, desire, and courage. 
It is up to you to seek out Discomfort Zone opportunities, 
especially with your employees who desire to learn and grow.
4.	 If the person has a baseline of skills and knowledge, you 
can energize her using what she knows instead of exhausting 
her with what you know. You must believe in people and be 
dedicated to helping them realize their hopes and dreams; 
their trust in you is built on this.

24
The Discomfort Zone
5.	 You need to hold a positive emotional intention throughout 
the conversation. Be patient, be curious, and be open to what 
transpires.
6.	 If the person is willing to see things differently, if he believes 
the conversation will have a payoff he desires, and if he has 
even a little bit of courage to let go of old habits of thinking, 
there is a good chance your Discomfort Zone conversation 
will be both successful and meaningful.
If you are committed to being the best leader you can be, 
a journey into the Discomfort Zone will help you achieve this 
noble goal.

