18   ANZPA Journal  # 20 2011 (www.anzpa.org)
Surplus Reality: 
The Magic Ingredient in Psychodrama
ALI WATERSONG
ABSTRACT
Anything that can be imagined can be created on the psychodramatic stage. This 
is the magic that makes surplus reality a central aspect and powerful tool of Dr. 
J.L. Moreno’s psychodrama method. Through surplus reality a person is able to 
enter the unknown, live out their fantasies and become the creator of their own 
life. Using psychodramatic work as illustration, Ali Watersong demonstrates the 
way that surplus reality facilitates the development of spontaneity, brings about 
social atom repair and assists in the formation of a positive identity. This article 
is adapted from the author’s 2008 Australian and New Zealand Psychodrama 
Association (ANZPA) accreditation thesis, The Magic of Surplus Reality: Developing 
Spontaneity and Bringing about Social Atom Repair.
KEY WORDS
as if, auxiliary ego, concretisation, imagination, locus nascendi, maximisation, 
neuroscience, protagonist, role reversal, social atom repair, spontaneity, status 
nascendi, surplus reality, systems theory, unconscious
Introduction 
The ﬁ rst time I hear the term ‘surplus reality’ is when I set out in psychodrama 
a photo of my mother holding me as an infant. My original experience of being 
desperately held by my terriﬁ ed mother is transformed into one of re-mothering 
by ‘The World’s Best Mother’. This new experience of being held and cared for 
in secure, loving, conﬁ dent arms shows me that it is possible to make new 
memories in the brain and the body. 
In my work conducting psychodrama groups in the community I am stimulated 
by the power of surplus reality to bring to life a person’s inner world so that their 
fantasies, hopes, fears, dreams, imaginings and unexpressed resentments are 
enacted on the psychodramatic stage. Women who attend these groups have 
frequently experienced some form of neglect, abuse or trauma in their formative 

ANZPA Journal # 20 2011 (www.anzpa.org)   19
years and these core early relationships have become the template for future 
relationships. Neuroscience research showing that the physical brain structure is 
shaped by early interpersonal experiences, conﬁ rms Moreno’s (1953) theories 
of personality formation and the impact of the original social atom. The social 
self is developed in response to the child’s ﬁ rst social situation (Schore, 1994). 
By entering into the realm of surplus reality and calling forth those things which 
lie outside normal life, old ways of functioning are examined and new roles and 
perceptions are developed. In surplus reality a person re-experiences the old 
conﬂ ict and develops a different warm up and new response, resulting in social 
atom repair.
As I apply psychodrama in my work I am developing my dramatic artistry and 
creative imagination. My ability to work with and play in the unknown is 
increasing. The more I use surplus reality the more I appreciate its magic and 
potential to transform and expand the human spirit.
Surplus Reality and Moreno
Dr J.L. Moreno coined the term surplus reality to refer to the situation in a 
psychodrama where a person is enacting something that exists in her imagination 
and subjective reality. It involves the expression of those things that are above 
and beyond what is normally expressed in life. Moreno was inﬂ uenced by Marx’s 
concept of surplus value. 
Surplus value is part of the earnings of the worker of which he is robbed by capitalistic 
employers. But surplus reality is, in contrast, not a loss but an enrichment of reality by 
the investments and extensive use of imagination. This expansion of experience is made 
possible in psychodrama by methods not used in life — auxiliary egos, auxiliary chair, 
double, role reversal, mirror, magic shop, the high chair, the psychodramatic baby, soliloquy, 
rehearsal of life, and others.            
Moreno (1965:212-213)
Moreno (1972a) deﬁ ned psychodrama as the science which investigates the 
truth by dramatic methods. This psychological truth consists of all aspects of a 
person’s experience, her inner and outer worlds. Psychodrama provides the bridge 
between objective reality and this inner subjective reality. Surplus reality enables 
the invisible, intangible dimensions of life that have not been fully experienced 
or expressed, to be concretised and enacted. Past, present and future events that 
are a reality in the imagination can all be displayed in the present on the 
psychodrama stage. Moreno knew that he could not truly meet the psyche of the 
protagonist unless he lived in the surplus reality together with the protagonist. 
Zerka Moreno (2000:18) values surplus reality highly. “The deepest catharsis 
in psychodrama comes from doing those scenes, those interactions, those 
moments that do not, cannot, and are not ever likely to happen in real life, for 

20   ANZPA Journal  # 20 2011 (www.anzpa.org)
whatever reason.” The use of surplus reality to express powerful emotions such 
as rage, provides an outlet that prevents acting out and frees up the underlying 
feelings of grief and longing in a catharsis of integration, as demonstrated in 
the following illustration.
Murdering Mother
Sue’s childhood has been punctuated by frequent physical and verbal abuse and 
as a result her adult life is chaotic, characterised by rejection and self-destructive 
behaviours. She is very angry, but her anger has been turned inwards and 
expressed through depression and self-harming behaviour. In a workshop Sue 
warms up to her relationship with her dead Nana from whom she did experience 
love. 
A scene is set out in the hospital where Nana is critically ill. Sue tells Nana 
that she loves her, something she was unable to do at the time. Sue’s mother 
minimises the seriousness of Nana’s condition and Sue becomes very angry. Her 
anger is maximised. The following dialogue takes place.
Sue  
I’m disgusted. This is your mother. She’s really sick.
Mother  
She’ll be all right. Stop making a fuss. You’re just upset because of  
 
your mental illness.  
 
           
Sue  
I hate you. You never wanted me. You always rejected me. And you’re 
 
doing it to Nana. She’s your mother!
Sue  
turning to the director … I want to kill her!
Director  
This is psychodrama. Anything can be enacted here. How do you  
 
want to kill her? 
 
     
Sue  
I want to hit her with the shovel and then bury her!
The new scene is enacted. Props are organised to assist the safe expression of 
anger on stage1. Sue warms up quickly and experiences a catharsis of rage as she 
hits cushions held in front of the auxiliary playing her mother. She shouts at her 
mother. “It’s not me who’s mentally ill, it’s you!” She yells and screams and 
continues to hit her mother until she is spent. She enlists group members to help 
her bury the body. Turning to her Nana, Sue weeps as she expresses her grief. 
Nana embraces her, saying “I love you. It wasn’t your fault that your parents 
rejected you”. Sue cries with relief as she experiences in word and action her 
Nana’s love and acceptance.
In acting out her murderous fantasy in this surplus reality enactment, the 
protagonist is able to release and integrate violent feelings that have become 
frozen in time. Anger often overlays feelings of loss and dependency and the 
need for love and acknowledgment, because it is more accessible than vulnerability. 
The catharsis of rage allows the underlying grief and longing to be experienced 
and as a result, Sue experiences a sense of mastery and empowerment.
In a drama such as this, the sharing phase is important to assist the protagonist 

ANZPA Journal # 20 2011 (www.anzpa.org)   21
to move from the surplus reality where she is in an altered state back to the here 
and now reality with the group. Sharing is a way to ground and reintegrate the 
protagonist, as well as a time for group members to de-role and connect up with 
one another. 
Surplus Reality, Concretisation and the Auxiliary Ego
Concretisation is the surplus reality technique that makes the protagonist’s 
private world tangible by representing individuals, absentees, delusions, 
hallucinations, symbols, ideals, animals and objects on the stage in a concrete 
way. It allows the protagonist to experience physically what has been experienced 
psychologically. The psychodramatist says, “Don’t tell me, show me”. The task 
of the auxiliary ego is to portray the protagonist’s perceptions of the internal 
ﬁ gures dominating her world, so that they can be encountered externally. In 
talking about the function of the auxiliary role, Moreno (1965) stresses the 
therapeutic use of bodily contact to give the subject the warmth and immediacy 
of life, not only in words but in action. For example, if there has been an absence 
of care and nurturing in childhood a person may need to experience in surplus 
reality a ‘new’ mother or father who can hold and hug her, and act in ways she 
wishes her mother or father had acted (Moreno, 1972a).
Healing Dad
Jane has difﬁ culty speaking up in the group. She warms up to a scene when she 
is three years old. She is holding hands with her father as they walk down the 
street. She skips happily beside him. Suddenly he shouts aggressively at her to 
stop. She immediately freezes. With maximisation and doubling from the 
director she curls up in a foetal position, crying and terriﬁ ed. This urge to curl 
up and cry is enacted fully. Jane is then invited to step outside the scene and 
choose an auxiliary to act for her in the scene. After a full re-enactment she 
warms up to comforting her child self. She eases the little girl’s fears, holding her 
securely, stroking her and talking to her. Gradually the child relaxes.
In this scene Jane warms up to what Moreno (1972a) calls the locus nascendi 
and status nascendi, the place and moment when it begins. This is the magic of 
surplus reality. We can enact any moment in someone’s subjective experience of 
life as if it is occurring here and now. Withdrawing and going silent in response 
to harsh treatment was Jane’s childhood survival strategy. However this time Jane 
is not alone. With doubling and maximisation she expresses the fear and distress 
she could not bring out in the original situation. Maximisation is a technique 
that expands and intensiﬁ es experiences of the psyche far beyond what is possible 
in ordinary life. This new expression is more physiologically consistent than the 
adaptive coping response of withdrawal. The enactment in surplus reality has 
enabled Jane to give and receive love and care at a deep feeling level. 
Jane is now free to be authentic with her father, Henry. A new scene is 

22   ANZPA Journal  # 20 2011 (www.anzpa.org)
produced involving him and his parents. His father died when he was six months 
old. His mother married a man who mistreated her and Henry. As Henry, Jane 
warms up and expresses grief to the father he never knew. Turning to Jane he 
embraces her saying, “I love you but I couldn’t show you”. In role reversal Jane 
weeps as she feels her father’s love.
In this enactment, the use of surplus reality facilitates the exploration of 
multi-generational experience. With enquiry there is an expansion of thinking 
and feeling, and the beliefs, values and culture of the family system become clear. 
Systems theory is an integral part of Moreno’s work. Once one part of the 
system has changed and become more spontaneous, there is the possibility of 
change and increased spontaneity in other parts of the system. 
In surplus reality the borders between objective reality and fantasy are dissolved 
and the boundaries of sex, death and age are transcended. On the psychodrama 
stage Jane reverses roles with her father, experiences the world through his eyes 
and expresses the grief that he has been carrying his whole life. There is a further 
catharsis of integration that enables Jane to forgive and reconcile with her Dad. 
Social atom repair has occurred. One of the core therapeutic tasks of psychodrama 
is accomplished through surplus reality, and that is the development of a cluster 
of progressive roles to repair the lack of doubling and mirroring in the original 
social atom.
Surplus Reality, ‘As-If’, Imagination and Play
The entire method of psychodrama is based on the principle of ‘as-if’ and the 
use of imagination.
Psychodrama is a way to change the world in the HERE AND NOW using the fun-
damental rules of imagination without falling into the abyss of illusion, hallucination 
or delusion. The human brain is the vehicle of imagination. Psychodrama, in training 
the imagination, overcomes the differences which hinder communication between the sexes, 
between the races, the generations, the sick and the healthy, between people and animals, 
between people and objects, between the living and the dead. The simple methods of psycho-
drama give us courage, return to us our lost unity with the universe, and re-establish the 
continuity of life.
                            Moreno’s Magic Charter of Psychodrama (1972b:131)                                                                   
Surplus reality is a way of extending and focussing the capacity for imagination 
and play. The development of the imagination transforms consciousness and 
contributes to the growth of hopefulness, originality, and the ability to entertain 
new ideas and enter into different realities than our own (Hosking, 1989). The 
psychodrama stage is viewed ‘as-if’ it was an imaginary arena in which anything, 
including the impossible, can happen (Kellermann, 1992). Entering into the 
world of make believe brings forth the quality that Moreno (1972a) called 

ANZPA Journal # 20 2011 (www.anzpa.org)   23
dramatic spontaneity, that which gives newness and vitality to feelings, actions 
and words, and assists in energising and unifying the self. Moreno believed that 
humans are cosmic beings as well as social beings. In surplus reality the mythic 
dimension of life can be portrayed. “God is always within and among us, as he 
is for children. Instead of coming down from the skies, he comes in by way of 
the stage door. God is not dead, he is alive, in psychodrama!” (Moreno & 
Moreno, 1975: 22).
Play is an essential human quality and the ability to play is fundamental to 
healing. Winnicott (1971) argues that in play the child or adult is free to be 
creative and use the whole personality, and that through creativity the individual 
discovers the self. The emphasis on play, imagination, intuition and creativity in 
surplus reality gives psychodrama its magical quality, as illustrated in the 
following scenario. 
Wonderwoman 
During a psychodramatic enactment, Stephanie becomes immobilised as she 
attempts to confront a childhood abuser. The producer’s interventions and 
attempts to expand the system fail to warm her up in a different way, and she 
remains stuck. She is coached to call upon Zena Warrior Princess. Stephanie 
immediately comes alive saying, “I’ll get Wonderwoman!” She ﬁ nds a ‘laser gun’ 
and a colourful Wonderwoman cape to wear and organises a ﬂ eet of ﬂ amingos 
to be her army. After a vigorous struggle she ﬁ ghts off the perpetrator, expressing 
her rage and indignation as she does so. She then comforts her frightened child 
self. She cries as she makes a new relationship with herself, one that is nurturing 
and protective.
In this example the imagination and creativity of the producer stimulate those 
of the protagonist. In entering into surplus reality and enacting her fantasy 
Stephanie increases her playfulness, spontaneity and creativity. Fragmentation is 
the outcome when there has been childhood abuse, as is the case with Stephanie. 
As the psychodramatist, it is important to double, to enter the protagonist’s 
world as a compassionate companion and to ensure that re-enactment is not a 
re-traumatising experience. 
Surplus Reality and the Body
There is a saying in psychodrama that the body remembers what the mind 
forgets. Zerka Moreno (1989) wisely counsels that the body is the royal road to 
the unconscious. In other words our bodies are communicating with us and 
others all the time but often we ignore their attempts at conversation. Through 
physical symptoms and signals the body expresses information that has not yet 
surfaced into consciousness. Unresolved emotional experiences may be somatised 
in the body. Concretising bodily experiences in surplus reality increases awareness 
and gives new insights, as illustrated in the following section.

24   ANZPA Journal  # 20 2011 (www.anzpa.org)
Th e Drama of the Body 
In a psychodramatic enactment, Lesley feels tension in her head, neck and 
shoulders and her legs feel achy and weak. Each of these bodily experiences is 
concretised. Lesley’s legs say, “I’m ready to run in case something bad happens!” 
She remembers that her father used to hit her on her legs when she was little and 
she would freeze in terror. Lesley is coached to express her feelings to her father, 
which facilitates a new warm up. No longer a powerless child, she integrates the 
painful childhood experience and processes it cognitively.
As a child, Lesley’s impulse to run away is prevented and she has somatised the 
experience. Her body stores the fear and the memory of the urge to run, although 
this memory has not been accessible to her cognition. “The symptoms of trauma 
are the result of a highly activated incomplete biological response to threat, frozen 
in time. By enabling this frozen response to thaw, then complete itself, trauma can 
be healed” (Kellerman, 2000:30). Through surplus reality Lesley gives her legs a 
voice and is then able to release frozen feelings. Catharsis is an intense body/
mind/emotion event. It breaks up body armouring and allows us to experience our 
bodies in ways that are more appropriate to the present circumstances. 
Using surplus reality to enact what is in the body deepens a person’s warm up 
and facilitates greater consciousness. It enables full expression and brings about 
greater vitality and creativity. By focusing on the physical, the action component 
of a role is given primacy which allows the feelings to emerge and the mind to 
be less dominant. Experiencing the world through the body and entering the 
realm of the emotional, metaphorical and sensory core of our being opens us to 
a wider range of possibilities. This is the magic of surplus reality.
These ideas are supported by a growing body of psychoneurobiology research 
into the relationships between the psyche (emotions, spirit), the nervous system 
(mind, neurons) and biology (body). Social interactions early in life result in the 
stimulation of both neurotransmitters and neural growth hormones that 
participate in the active building of the brain (Schore, 1994). Fear, stress and 
trauma all affect brain chemistry while trauma memory is stored in the body 
(Pert, 1999). New neuroscience research also provides evidence that the brain is 
malleable and is continually being rebuilt. For example, Cozolino (2002) 
maintains that the involvement of affect and cognition appears necessary in the 
therapeutic process in order to create the context for the integration of dissociated 
neural circuits. This can be said to be provided by the surplus reality of 
psychodramatic enactment whereby a catharsis of integration is achieved with the 
expression of feeling coupled with cognitive insights. Thus psychodrama with its 
emphasis on experiential learning in enriched environments provides new positive 
experiences that stimulate neural plasticity and assist the neural rewiring that is 
required for new learning. This is a rich area for further research. For example, 
McVea (2009) is involved in investigations into protagonists’ change processes 
during psychodrama. The impact of psychodramatic enactment on neural 
functioning could also be investigated using brain imaging technology. 

ANZPA Journal # 20 2011 (www.anzpa.org)   25
Surplus Reality and the Protagonist
For most people ordinary living requires a degree of restraint and intense feelings 
tend to be toned down. The freedom from all ordinary conventions in the surplus 
reality enactment is one of the unique therapeutic potentials of psychodrama. 
Therapeutic change occurs through a corrective emotional experience as feelings 
are discharged, accompanied by cognitive insights. Trauma recovery and the 
undoing and redoing of past negative experiences are made possible through 
surplus reality. New memories in the brain and body are created as neural 
functioning is stimulated by the enriched environment in the psychodrama 
group. Surplus reality enactment increases spontaneity, originality and creativity 
and the development of a positive identity. 
New progressive roles characterised by vitality and ﬂ exibility are developed as 
old roles are modiﬁ ed, old warm ups drop away and the person experiences new 
strength, creativity and self-acceptance. Warming up to a spontaneous state leads 
to highly organised patterns of conduct and the individual integrates her feelings, 
beliefs and actions. As her role repertoire expands with the incorporation of 
new progressive roles there is more ﬂ exibility resulting in more integrated 
functioning. She builds healthy relationships with people thus creating a new, 
more life-enhancing social atom. 
Surplus Reality and the Psychodramatist 
In order to tap the healing power of surplus reality the psychodramatist must 
have the courage to enter the unknown. A central component of the training is 
the development of the imagination and the ability to play, so that the producer 
can participate wholeheartedly in the fantasy world of her protagonist. A person’s 
bodily expression cuts to the core of her experience. Hence the producer of a 
drama must be alert to body cues and develop the capacity to notice the smallest 
movement or ﬂ icker of facial expression and bring it to consciousness. Surplus 
reality can also be used to expand a person’s experience of the sociodramatic 
inﬂ uences of gender, race, class, sexuality and able-bodyism. 
The ability to access and stay alive to the roles of magician, spontaneous actor, 
playful companion and believer in the creative genius will enhance the potency of the 
practitioner. By using the dimension of surplus reality the psychodramatist is 
modelling a way of being in the world that unleashes a person’s power to be 
spontaneous, and assists her to achieve her own creative potential. 
Surplus Reality Extended 
Writers since Moreno have extended the concept of surplus reality. Blatner 
(2003) notes that the root of the word imagination is ‘magic’. He encourages 
the psychodramatist to develop her role as magician by use of symbols, ‘familiars’ 
and incantations, to invoke magical powers by opening her mind to channel the 

26   ANZPA Journal  # 20 2011 (www.anzpa.org)
unnameable spirits of intuition and imagination. Blomkvist and Rutzel (1994) 
view surplus reality as an instrument of disintegration and chaos. In surplus 
reality one moves from the known to the unknown where the ego’s ability to 
control and understand ceases. “When the drama enters the stage the protagonist 
and the director are in the hands of the drama and not vice versa” (p.238). The 
purpose of the psychodrama is not to ﬁ nd a solution but to allow full 
expression. 
Kipper (2000) describes the Experiential Reintegration Model (ERM) that 
focuses on using psychodramatic enactment to alter a person’s experiential pool. 
Undoing and redoing are fundamental surplus reality techniques which allow 
here and now changes to develop. Deliberately dissolving boundaries on the 
stage and temporarily removing the limitations imposed by time, space and 
actual reality results in powerful therapeutic effects. Hudgins (2002) developed 
the Therapeutic Spiral Model to assist in social atom repair with trauma survivors 
by using surplus reality to enact scenes of restoration and repair. Surplus reality 
allows for a broad systemic perspective on the socio-political culture in which a 
protagonist has developed. The spirit of patriarchy, of colonisation or of the 
Catholic Church, for example, can be concretised and enacted, bringing forth 
the values and ideas of the dominant culture that impact on a person’s role 
development. 
Conclusion
The psychodrama method assists people to fully experience all aspects of their 
subjective and objective worlds. On the psychodrama stage they examine old 
ways of functioning, develop new ways of being, reorganise roles and bring 
about social atom repair. The magic of surplus reality lies in the use of the 
imagination and play in this endeavour. It allows us to go beyond the prosaic and 
mundane and dare to live out our fantasies and imaginings. Enactment in surplus 
reality wakes up the senses and brings us alive as we experience ourselves and 
others in the here and now. For a period we live in Kairos time rather than 
Chronos time2. As we experience our creative genius we develop new ways of 
being, we strengthen our ability to love and accept ourselves, we expand our 
capacity to give and receive love, and we increase our enjoyment of life. 
Surplus reality in psychodrama addresses our deep hunger to explore creative 
potential by experiencing and expressing all that we are and expanding into the 
abundance of life.   
END NOTES
1.A range of techniques is used to assist the safe expression of anger and rage on the psychodrama 
stage: group members hold big cushions for the protagonist to kick, punch or push against; 

ANZPA Journal # 20 2011 (www.anzpa.org)   27
batons or strips of sheeting with a knot tied at the end are used to smash the ﬂ oor or a cushion; 
the protagonist is coached to breathe deeply and bring the sound out from the belly so there is 
no strain on the larynx; several people hold the protagonist ﬁ rmly by the legs, arms and shoulders, 
so that she must use all her strength to free herself; the protagonist lies on a mattress on the ﬂ oor 
while several people hold her down and she then ﬁ ghts them off; auxiliaries need to provide 
enough resistance safely so that the protagonist feels the constraint and ﬁ ghts hard but not so 
much that she cannot break free; group members double the protagonist as she expresses anger 
to avoid a warm up to shame.
2. The ancient Greeks had two words for time, chronos and kairos. Chronos refers to chronological 
or sequential time. Kairos means the right or opportune moment to act. It signiﬁ es an 
undetermined period of time in which something special happens. It has a qualitative eternal 
nature where awareness of everyday time diminishes and one is very present.
REFERENCES
Blatner, A. (2003). Making “Magic”: Imagination and Action in Therapy and Life. Accessed at <http:/www.blatner.com/
adam/pdntbk/magic.htm>.
Blomkvist, L.D. & Rutzel, T. (1994). Surplus Reality and Beyond. In Holmes, P., Karp, M. & Watson, M. 
(Eds.) Psychodrama Since Moreno: Innovations in Theory and Practice. Routledge, London, UK.
Cozolino, L.J. (2002). The Neuroscience of Psychotherapy: Building and Rebuilding the Human Brain. W.W. Norton & Co, 
New York, USA.
Hosking, C. (1989). Transforming a Poverty Consciousness: The Development of the Mind Faculty of Imagination Through 
Psychodrama. Australian and New Zealand Psychodrama Association (ANZPA) AccreditationThesis, 
Hudgins, K. (2002). Experiential Treatment for P.T.S.D.: The Therapeutic Spiral Model. Springer, New York, USA.
Kellermann, P. F. (1992). Focus on Psychodrama: The Therapeutic Aspects of Psychodrama. Jessica Kingsley, London, UK.
Kellermann, P. F. (2000). The Therapeutic Aspects of Psychodrama with Traumatised People. In Kellermann, 
P.F. & Hudgins, M.K. (Eds.) Psychodrama with Trauma Survivors: Acting Out Your Pain. Jessica Kingsley, London, 
UK.
Kipper, D.A. (2000). Surplus Reality and the Experiential Reintegration Model in Psychodrama. International 
Journal of Action Methods: Psychodrama, Skill Training & Role Playing 53(3-4):137-152.
McVea, C.S. (2009). Resolving Painful Emotional Experience during Psychodrama. Dissertation for the Degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, AU.
Moreno, J.L. (1953). Who Shall Survive? Foundations of Sociometry, Group Psychotherapy and Sociodrama (Student Edition). 
Royal Publishing Company, Virginia, USA. (Original Publication 1934) 
Moreno, J.L. (1965). Therapeutic Vehicles and the Concept of Surplus Reality. Journal of Group Psychotherapy, 
Psychodrama and Sociometry 18(4):211-216.
Moreno, J.L. (1972a). Psychodrama First Volume (Fourth Edition). Beacon House, New York, USA. (Original 
Publication 1946).
Moreno, J.L. (1972b). The Magic Charter of Psychodrama. Journal of Group Psychotherapy, Psychodrama and 
Sociometry 25(4)131.
Moreno, J.L. & Moreno, Z.T. (1975). Psychodrama Third Volume: Action Therapy and Principles of Practice (Second 
Edition). Beacon House, New York, USA. (Original Publication 1969).
Moreno, Z.T. (1989). Psychodrama, Role Theory and the Concept of the Social Atom. Journal of Group 
Psychotherapy, Psychodrama and Sociometry 42(3):178-186.

28   ANZPA Journal  # 20 2011 (www.anzpa.org)
Moreno, Z.T. (2000). Interview with Leif Dag Blomkvist regarding Surplus Reality. In Moreno, Z.T., 
Blomkvist, L.D. & Rutzel, T. Psychodrama, Surplus Reality and the Art of Healing (Ch.4, pp.17-23). Routledge, 
London, UK.
Pert, C. (1999). Molecules of Emotion: Why You Feel the Way You Do. Touchstone, New York, USA.
Schore, A.N. (1994). Affect Regulation and the Origin of the Self: The Neurobiology of Emotional Development. Erlbaum, 
Hillsdale, New Jersey, USA.
Winnicott, D.W. (1971). Playing and Reality. Penguin Books, Middlesex, UK.
Ali Watersong is a psychodramatist and counsellor in Christchurch, 
Aotearoa New Zealand. She works with individuals and couples in 
private practice and conducts experiential psychodrama workshops. 
Ali is currently president of the Australian and New Zealand 
Psychodrama Association (ANZPA) Canterbury Westland region. She 
loves the mountains and sea, making things out of wood and teaching guitar to small children 
in Lyttelton. Ali can be contacted at <watersong@slingshot.co.nz>.
