Ho Law 
The Psychology 
of  Coaching, 
Mentoring and
Learning 
Second Edition 


The Psychology of Coaching,  
Mentoring and Learning


The Psychology of Coaching, 
Mentoring and Learning
Second Edition
Ho Law

This edition first published 2013
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
First edition published 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley’s global Scientific, 
Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Registered Office
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial Offices
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148-5020, USA
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services, and for information about how  
to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at  
www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
The right of Ho Law to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the 
UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, 
except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission 
of the publisher.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print 
may not be available in electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand 
names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered 
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor 
mentioned in this book.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts 
in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy 
or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of 
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is 
not engaged in rendering professional services and neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable 
for damages arising herefrom. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services  
of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Law, Ho.
  The psychology of coaching, mentoring and learning / Ho Law. – Second edition.
    pages  cm
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-1-119-95466-8 (pbk.)
1.  Personal coaching.  2.  Executive coaching.  3.  Mentoring.  4.  Learning, Psychology of.  I.  Title. 
  BF637.P36L4 2014
  158.3–dc22
2013012020
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Cover image: Ladder to the sun © Mehmet Salih Guler / Getty Images
Cover design by Richard Boxall Design Associates
Set in 10/12.5pt Galliard by SPi Publisher Services, Pondicherry, India
1  2013

Contents
About the Author
vii
Foreword to the First Edition by Stephen Palmer
ix
Preface to the Second Edition
xiii
Acknowledgements
xvii
   1	 Introduction
1
   2	 The Coming of Age: Coaching Psychology,  
Coaching and Mentoring
9
   3	 Philosophy and Theories of Learning Applicable to Coaching  
and Mentoring: Positive Psychology and the Learning Process
23
   4	 Definitions: Coaching Psychology, Coaching,  
Mentoring and Learning
53
   5	 Leadership and Organizational Coaching and Mentoring:  
Becoming a Learning Organization and Learning Community
63
   6	 Developing a Universal Integrative Framework  
for Coaching and Mentoring
91
   7	 Techniques and Tools
119
   8	 Continuing Professional Development, Learning Resources  
and Practical Exercises
153
   9	 Case Studies
175
10  Evaluation
203
11  Conclusion, Discussion, Future Research and Development
219
References
237
Index
253


About the Author
Dr Ho Law is an international consultant and practitioner psychologist, Health and 
Care Professions Council (HCPC) registered occupational psychologist, Associate 
Fellow of the British Psychological Society (BPS), Fellow of the Chartered 
Management Institute (Chartered Manager), Fellow of the Higher Education 
Academy, Fellow of the Royal Society of Medicine, and BPS Registered Coaching 
Psychologist, Chartered Scientist, Chartered Psychologist, and Registered Applied 
Psychology Practice Supervisor. Ho has had over 25 years of experience in psychology 
and management consultancy. He has delivered numerous workshops and conference 
­seminars, and carried out consultancy work in the UK and abroad (both in the East 
and in the West). Ho values diversity in people, respects their cultures, and believes in 
equal opportunities for all. He was one of the first equality advisers to the Assistant 
Permanent Undersecretary of State in the Home Office; he was also the Deputy Chair 
of the BPS Standing Committee for Promotion of Equal Opportunities. Ho is pas-
sionate about helping people to develop their talents and achieve their full potential 
through coaching and mentoring. Ho is a founding member and the former Chair of 
the BPS Special Group in Coaching Psychology; he is also founding director and trea-
surer of the International Society for Coaching Psychology. He has published over 40 
papers and received numerous ­outstanding achievement awards, such as the Local 
Promoters for Cultural Diversity Project in 2003; the Positive Image (Business 
Category) in 2004; and Management Essentials Participating Company in 2005. He 
was also winner of the first Student Led Teaching Award (2013) – Best Supervisor. 
He is the Head of Profession in Coaching Psychology, the founding director of 
Empsy® Ltd and the president of Empsy® Network for coaching (www.empsy.com). 
At the University of East London School of Psychology, Ho is a Senior Lecturer, 
Co-Programme Leader in the MSc Coaching Psychology programme, Admissions 
Tutor, and Leader Tutor in the distance-learning programme (http://www.uel.ac.uk/
programmes/psychology/­postgraduate/coachingpsychology-dl.htm). Ho is currently 
supervising two part-time students’ PhDs at the University of East London, and the 
students are working in the United Arab Emirates.


Foreword to the First Edition
Stephen Palmer
The psychology of coaching, mentoring and learning is an exciting and rapidly 
expanding area. However, psychology’s contribution to particular fields is often over-
looked; and the field of coaching and mentoring is no exception. For example, many 
coaching courses teach students how to coach by using a basic model or structure on 
how to hold a conversation with a client. One example is the GROW model, the 
name of which is a useful acronym standing for Growth, Reality, Options and Will 
(or wrap-up). In addition, courses usually include a range of listening and communi-
cation skills. Yet the whole programme is often taught within a psychological vacuum, 
as little or no psychological theory or research is covered that underpins coaching 
practice. We could conclude that most coaching practice is belief-based. Brent Rushall 
at San Diego State University describes belief-based coaching as
a common and traditional form of coaching. Its guides for practices are usually a mix of 
personal experiences, some limited education about sport sciences, selected incomplete 
knowledge of current coaching practices, and self-belief in that how coaching is conduc­
ted is right. Changes in coaching practices occur through self-selection of activities. The 
accumulated knowledge of belief-based coaching is subjective, biased, unstructured, and 
mostly lacking in accountability. Belief-based coaching also includes pseudo-scientific 
coaching. Pseudo-scientists attempt to give the impression of scientific knowledge but 
invariably their knowledge is incomplete resulting in false/erroneous postulations. 
­Belief-based coaching is normally the foundation of most coaching development schemes. 
Organizations are closed (isolated) systems resisting intrusions of contrary evidence that 
might alter the constancy of the beliefs and social structure. Logical (knowledge) entropy 
increases with time in these structures. (Rushall, 2003: 1)
This excellent description of belief-based coaching highlights how often practitioners 
do not necessarily underpin their practice with psychological theory and academic 
research. Is there an alternative? Fortunately there is. In academic institutions and 
within coaching-related professional bodies there is a gradual trend towards evidence-
based practice. Rushall (2003) describes evidence-based coaching as

x	
Foreword to the First Edition
a restricted and relatively rare form of coaching. Its guides for practices are principles 
derived from replicated reputable studies reported by authoritative sources in a public 
manner. Often there is consideration of objective studies that do and do not support 
­principles. Evidence-based coaches have fewer guides for practices, but what are included 
are highly predictive for accomplishing particular training effects. The accumulated 
knowledge of evidence-based coaching is objectively verified and structured. However, 
evidence-based coaching principles are developed in a fragmented scientific world. It could 
be somewhat difficult to gather all the relevant knowledge into an educational scheme. 
Organizations are open systems structured to constantly accept new knowledge and 
­concepts. Logical (knowledge) entropy decreases markedly as order is established. 
(Rushall, 2003: 1)
Applying evidence-based practice is the challenge facing the profession of coaching 
and mentoring, as we need more research to inform our practice. However, in recent 
years, with the launch of relevant coaching, coaching psychology and mentoring 
academic and practitioner journals, researchers and psychologists are in a better 
­position to publish their research findings. These journals include the International 
Coaching Psychology Review, The Coaching Psychologist, and the International Journal 
of Evidence Based Coaching and Mentoring. What has been noticeable is the gradual 
increase in the number of published papers showing the effectiveness of using 
­solution-focused and cognitive behavioural coaching approaches with non-clinical 
populations. There are plenty of published research papers highlighting how effective 
these approaches are with clinical populations; but the real challenge has been to 
prove that they are effective with non-clinical populations.
But, of course, it could all be down to the coaching relationship, and not to the 
approach to coaching. This has been the argument we have heard so often in the 
field of psychotherapy. Grbcic and Palmer (2006) decided in a research study to 
dispense with the coach (or therapist) and just test the cognitive–behavioural 
­methodology on managers by using a manualized, self-coaching approach to 
stress management and prevention at work. Did it work? If it was largely down 
to the practitioner–client ­relationship, then it should not have worked! In this 
randomized controlled trial, ­statistically significant results were obtained indi-
cating intervention effectiveness regardless of the frequency of work stressors and 
lack of organizational support remaining unchanged. The control group remained 
the same, unlike the self-­coaching group, which showed measurable improve-
ment. Hence, in a short period of time, of about six years, researchers are already 
making substantial progress and building up data that can make a positive impact 
upon evidence-based practice.
It should not come as much of a surprise to learn that recent surveys have found 
that the most popular approaches being practised by UK-based coaching psycholo-
gists are the facilitation, solution-focused and cognitive–behavioural approaches 
(Whybrow and Palmer, 2006). This is relevant as the meteoric rise in popularity of 
coaching psychology in the UK has led to more research being undertaken by post-
graduate students on university courses or doctorate programmes. This exciting 
development parallels the creation of the Coaching Psychology Forum in 2002 and 
the subsequent launch of the British Psychological Society Special Group in Coaching 
Psychology in 2004. Dr Ho Law was one of the key figures in the setting up of both 
groups.

	
Foreword to the First Edition
xi
Unlike this book, the early literature on the psychology of coaching and on ­coaching 
psychology focused on the psychology of sports coaching (e.g. Griffith, 1926; Lawther, 
1951; Gaylord, 1967; Tutko and Richards, 1971; Wilt and Bosen, 1971; Llewellyn 
and Blucker, 1982). This book adds to evidence-based practice by ­attempting to unify 
psychological theories that underpin coaching, mentoring and learning. The core 
element of the book is based on three years of research and development in the psy-
chology of coaching, mentoring and learning. The research and practice provided a 
foundation to develop a universal integrated framework that should be applicable 
across cultures. This book is a welcome addition to the literature and will inform the 
fields of mentoring, evidence-based coaching and coaching psychology.
References
Gaylord, C. (1967). Modern coaching psychology. Iowa: W. M. C. Brown Book Company.
Grbcic, S. & Palmer, S. (2006). A cognitive–behavioural self-help approach to stress 
management and prevention at work: A randomized controlled trial. Conference 
paper presented on 24 November 2006 at the Joint Association for Rational Emotive 
­Behaviour Therapy and the Association for Multimodal Psychology National Conference 
in ­London, UK.
Griffith, C. R. (1926). Psychology of coaching: A study of coaching methods from the point of view 
of psychology. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Lawther, J. D. (1951). Psychology of coaching. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Llewellyn, J. H. & Blucker, J. A. (1982). Psychology of coaching: Theory and application. 
­Minneapolis, MN: Burgess Publishing Company.
Rushall, B. S. (2003). Coaching development and the second law of thermodynamics [or 
­belief-based versus evidence-based coaching development]. Downloaded on 8/11/06 
from http://www-rohan.sdsu.edu/dept/coachsci/csa/thermo/thermo.htm
Tutko, T. A. & Richards, J. W. (1971). Psychology of coaching. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Whybrow, A. & Palmer, S. (2006). Shifting perspectives: One year into the development of 
the British Psychological Society Special Group in Psychology in the UK. International 
Coaching Psychology Review, 1.2, 75–85.
Wilt, F. & Bosen, K. (1971). Motivation and coaching psychology. Los Altos, CA: Tafnews Press.


Preface to the Second Edition
The engagement in coaching, mentoring and learning is part of life itself. Like life, 
it continuously evolves and changes. Since the publication of the first edition of this 
book, a lot has happened in the coaching psychology world. For instance, from 1 July 
2009, professionals who are practising psychology in the UK are required by law to 
register with the Health Professions Council (now Health and Care Professions 
Council) as practitioner psychologists. While at present coaching and mentoring 
remain unregulated, the debate on their standards and practices continues. The first 
edition of this book reported the development of the British Psychological Society’s 
(BPS) Special Group in Coaching Psychology (SGCP), which was formed in 2004; 
in 2012 the BPS set up a Register of Coaching Psychologists, in acknowledgement 
and recognition of those practitioner psychologists who have specialist expertise in 
­coaching psychology.
I was saddened to learn the tragic news that Michael White, my teacher in narrative 
therapy, died from a heart attack on 4 April 2008 in San Diego, aged 59. We last met 
only a few months before, at the Narrative Conference in Norway, where we discussed 
with enthusiasm (as always) how we could transport narrative practice into reinvigorat-
ing other people’s lives, hopes and dreams. I hope the second edition of this book 
serves to honour Michael’s contributions to people’s lived stories, including mine.
As for the three authors of the first edition, our lives have changed too. Since the 
publication of the first edition, we have gone our separate ways. Sara Ireland left her 
job in the healthcare sector and furthered her professional development. Zulfi Hussain 
continues to develop his other business engagements. Both Sara and Zulfi resigned 
from their positions as directors at Morph Group Limited in 2008. The company 
remained dormant for a few years and eventually was dissolved on 3 April 2012. In 
2009 I became Senior Lecturer at the University of East London (UEL), helping to 
lead its coaching psychology programme. I have been dividing my time between my 
academic engagements and business consultancy ever since.
In this edition I have continuously advocated a vigorous scientific approach towards 
coaching and mentoring processes, their theories and practices. This demands an evi-
dence-based evaluation, taking into account the output and outcome as well as the 
stakeholders’ experience of the coaching intervention. The concept of a ‘journey’ is 

xiv	
Preface to the Second Edition
used as a metaphor for coaching and mentoring. For many of us, it is a journey of 
discovery and rediscovery, one full of surprises. Most of all, the journey has been 
punctuated with magical moments in coaching and mentoring engagements, as in 
life. I continue to take pleasure in sharing some of these surprises and experiences in 
writing this book, which started another journey of its own.
The ‘writing journey’ was punctuated by the loss of my father, who passed away in 
Hong Kong on 9 May in 2012. I had to travel to and fro between the UK and Hong 
Kong and I was particularly touched by all the support I received during this period. My 
colleagues at UEL from both the BSc and the MSc programme teams stepped in at 
short notice to do the necessary student supervision, marking, and double-marking of 
the assignments, within a very tight schedule; their support has made me feel part of the 
team and of the community in which I feel blessed. There is a Chinese proverb saying 
that it is easy to add icing on the cake, but it is difficult to give support to someone in 
destitution. It is the times of hardship that test true collegiality, fellow-feeling and 
friendship. I thank my colleagues for making such great teams.
My father went through a proper traditional Chinese funeral. The ritual and its 
­procedures were quite novel to me (as I have been out of touch with my own culture 
for so long). They offered me and other members of my family, especially my mother, 
a scaffolding for grieving. My father, aged 96, had witnessed a lot of changes during 
the wars and cultural revolution in China before he moved to Hong Kong. On reflec-
tion, though, he enjoyed a long and happy life, especially in his later years, seeing all 
six of his children grow up and achieve their aspirations – and starting to see the same 
in the grandchildren. He left no unfinished business. So, in his case, the funeral was 
truly a celebration of the completion of his life, even though sometimes there is still a 
kind of strange, lingering sense of loss…
My father’s middle and first names are Kai Sin; they mean ‘showing’ and ‘kindness’. 
These words resonate with the spirit of coaching and mentoring. I shall hold onto this 
spirit, keep it dearly in my heart and attempt to manifest unconditional kindness in 
everything I do.
In all my engagements I have continued to be active in teaching, learning, research 
and development – all in coaching psychology. The preparation of this second edition 
reflects my ongoing commitment to the development of coaching psychology as a dis-
cipline. And I keep my conviction that coaching psychology is a scientific discipline, yet 
there is a magic to its art.
Following the same structure as the first edition, this edition contains the essence 
of that book. While both Sara and Zufi contributed to the development of the initial 
universal integrated framework (UIF), I have further refined the framework through 
ongoing research and development. Thus I have taken care to update all the chapters 
and to ensure that they remain current, coherent, and consistent as a whole. The key 
additions are:
•  the results of the Global Coaching Survey commissioned by the International 
Coach Federation (ICF) and the latest discussion on the Coming of Age: Coaching 
Psychology (Chapter 2);
•  updated literature on learning theories, including social learning theories and 
­narrative practices (Chapter 3);

	
Preface to the Second Edition
xv
•  recent business case studies and the agile coaching approach in developing a 
learning organization (Chapter 5);
•  an updated UIF model, including systems approach and alternative representa-
tions of the model across cultures (Chapter 6);
•  new case studies in coaching and mentoring (Chapter 9);
•  an up-to-date discussion on coaching and mentoring, their standards and their 
­supervision (Chapter 11).
The online tool that was developed in the first edition is now further refined to measure 
an individual’s cultural and social competence (CSC) as a self-assessment questionnaire 
(SAQ). This is now available at http://www.uelpsychology.org/csc/ and readers can 
contact me to gain access to using the tool.
So, whatever your interest in the process of coaching or mentoring, I hope this 
book takes another step forward in widening your access to its practice through the 
psychology of learning. For aspiring individuals everywhere who have experienced the 
benefits of coaching or mentoring directly, I hope that you might feel just a little 
closer to understanding some of the theories behind how this process works. And for 
those still looking in from the outside, I hope the approach presented in this book 
encourages you to get involved.
There is a time for everything,
and a season for every activity under the heavens:
a time to be born and a time to die,
a time to plant and a time to uproot.
(Ecclesiastes 3: 1–2)
Now it’s time to learn and to get involved in coaching and mentoring…


Acknowledgements
As happened in the first edition, there are, inevitably, many names to ­acknowledge, 
including those of family members and friends, who have been taken for granted 
while this book was being written; and there are also many unintentional ­omissions. 
So, without mentioning every possible individual, I shall list some of those 
who  have continued to inspire me as well as some of the contributors – the 
unsung heroes and organizations within the context of my journey of preparing 
this edition.
Thanks go to:
•  Dr Carla Gibbes, Senior Lecturer at the University of East London, for her 
­kindness and support;
•  Liz Hall, for communicating the concept of narrative coaching to wider 
professional communities via Coaching at Work;
•  Trevor Hall, OBE, CBE, who has continued to inspire me in championing equality 
and diversity in my cross-cultural journey, in my career, and in life;
•  Professor Stephen Palmer, for his continuous support and for updating the 
Foreword;
•  Kaemorine Prendergast, for her kindness and righteousness in championing 
equality;
•  Aquilina Reginald, my former coaching student, for helping me to introduce 
coaching to nursing and for contributing to the case study on leadership coaching 
in the healthcare sector in Malta;
•  Dr Donald Ridley, principal lecturer at the University of East London, for his 
support and guidance;
•  Christine Stocker-Gibson, for contributing to the case study on Community 
Coaching Cafẻ;
•  Michael White, Dulwich Centre, who inspired and trained me in narrative 
approaches from down under: his spirit will continue to manifest itself in my 
­narrative coaching.

xviii	
Acknowledgements
Organizations that have provided me with support and information for this edition are:
•  the Association for Coaching;
•  the British Psychological Society’s (BPS) Special Group in Coaching Psychology;
•  the Chartered Management Institute (CMI);
•  the European Mentoring and Coaching Council (EMCC);
•  the International Coach Federation (ICF) – which gave me permission to publish 
the results of its Global Coaching Study (ICF and PricewaterhouseCoopers, 2012)
•  the International Society for Coaching Psychology.
Most of all, I would like to thank all those whom I came across in my coaching 
or  mentoring journey, in many spaces and places, starting with the place where 
I live: people in Peterborough and the neighbouring areas within Cambridgeshire. It 
was here that a number of coaching and mentoring programmes took place – for 
­communities, for individuals, for private and public organizations. It was here that 
some of the case studies have been consolidated. It was here that the universal 
integrated framework was developed, through our lived experience.
And from the place where I work, in particular, I would like to thank all my col-
leagues in the School of Psychology, University of East London, where the 2012 
London Olympics and Paralympics took place. The place truly embodies the spirit of 
the games, which is to inspire individuals to achieve their highest potential; for this is 
the spirit of coaching and mentoring too!
There are many more of you out there who have contributed to my understanding. 
To you, perhaps the unacknowledged, I offer my thanks.
Ho Law
Peterborough, England
Disclaimers
The views expressed in this book are those of the author, and not those of the 
­publisher, or Empsy Ltd, or UEL or anyone else. This is in no way affected by the 
right reserved by the author to edit the cases published. Owing to the requirement for 
confidentiality within our code of ethics, the context and stories of some case studies 
may have been adapted and individual identities kept anonymous. If the case studies 
­documented in this book have omitted any partners’ contributions, this is entirely 
unintentional.
Any constructive comments and suggestions for future editions of this book are 
welcome. Please write to:
Ho Law PhD CPsychol CSci CMgr MISCP(Accred) AFBPsS FCMI FHEA
PO Box 696
Peterborough PE2 9YQ
England, UK
Email:
Personal: ho.law@ntlworld.com
Company: ho.law@empsy.com
http://www.empsy.com/

	
Acknowledgements
xix
Twitter: @empsy
www.twitter.com/empsy
University: law2@uel.ac.uk
http://www.uel.ac.uk/psychology/staff/hochunglaw/
Internet: drholaw@gmail.com
Ho Law


The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning, Second Edition. Ho Law. 
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Introduction
This book is about the psychology of coaching, mentoring and learning. There are 
many books about learning and mentoring; there are even more about coaching. 
However, there are very few books that bring together these important, diverse and 
growing fields, making them intersect. The title of the book reflects the value I place 
on diversity in the emerging discipline of coaching and how the latter can be enriched 
by being continuously expanded so as to include mentoring, while it remains grounded 
in the solid foundation of the psychology of learning.
Aims
The aim of this chapter is to help readers gain a rapid understanding of the nature of 
the book and find easily the information it offers. It provides a rationale for the book, 
together with a résumé of its overall structure and a brief description of each chapter. 
It also suggests how readers working at different levels can use the book to make it 
meet their interests, experience and professional competence.
Whom Is It For?
The purpose of this book is to show how individuals and organizations can apply the 
theories and principles of psychology in coaching, mentoring and learning. To this 
end, the book is written for the following groups:
•  coaches, mentors and trainers who would like to learn the general theories and 
principles of psychology that underpin coaching, mentoring and learning;
•  psychologists who want to apply their experience to the coaching, mentoring and 
training of individuals and organizations;
1

2	
The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning
•  senior executives and managers responsible for the use of training budgets, who 
would like to realize their potential benefit and understand how to design and 
evaluate effective training programmes for their organizations;
•  students of psychology who would like to consider their future career in coaching, 
mentoring and training.
I am aware that the emerging field of coaching and mentoring, coupled with the 
popularity of psychology in the UK, will attract a very wide readership. Thus my 
intended readership is not limited to the categories described above. Readers may 
well include teachers, instructors and anyone involved in coaching, mentoring, 
training or supervision.
With the rapid development of coaching and mentoring as an industry, much 
­confusion exists between the psychology of coaching and mentoring and the 
­psychology of counselling and psychotherapy. In comparison to the development of 
psychotherapy as a discipline, we have found in our disciplines a lot more sharing of 
practices, which has been promoted by various coaching and mentoring organizations 
(see Chapter 2).
How This Book Differs from Others
There are many books on coaching and mentoring in the market. However, this book 
differs from others in the following aspects:
•  As far as I am aware, in its first edition, this has been the first book in the UK to 
attempt to bring together the psychological theory that underpins coaching, 
­mentoring and learning. It embodies a number of developments in coaching and 
mentoring, as well as in coaching psychology. It traces the development of the 
Special Group in Coaching Psychology within the British Psychological Society, 
which addresses coaching psychology as a discipline.
•  It reflects the latest thinking, research and development in coaching psychology 
through high-level theories, principles and practical applications. This second 
edition ensures that the research and development are up to date.
•  It applies psychology to both coaching/mentoring and learning, thereby blurring 
the boundaries between these disciplines and yet addressing the differences bet-
ween them.
•  It contains cross-cultural elements that make the theories universal and applicable 
across different cultures.
•  It applies, to coaching and mentoring, the general psychology of learning rather 
than psychotherapy (Chapter 3).
•  It demonstrates the know-how and exercises with step-by-step instructions, as 
well as with case studies from diverse organizational and community contexts 
(Chapters 7–9).
•  It includes a chapter on evaluation that demonstrates the effectiveness of 
applying the psychology of learning to coaching, mentoring and learning 
(Chapter 10).

	
Introduction
3
Working terminology
Before you get going, this section offers some pragmatic working definitions to those 
of you who have no knowledge of coaching, mentoring and learning. These defini-
tions will be further refined in Chapter 4. Broadly speaking, the book talks about 
processes and activities that support learning. In this context, ‘learning’ can be defined 
as a cognitive process of acquiring skill and knowledge. ‘Coaching’ is often described 
as a process of offering support to an individual; this process is performance-focused 
and goal-centred and it results in action. A ‘mentor’ – a term used in mentoring – is 
a critical friend who oversees the development of another. All these processes are 
learner-centred and learner-driven. A theme running throughout this book is the 
cross-cultural application of coaching and mentoring. ‘Culture’ is broadly defined as 
the predominant attitudes and behaviour that characterize the functioning of a group, 
community or organization; we typically apply it to a whole range of contexts: coun-
tries, ethnic categories, professions, workplaces. The term ‘cross-cultural’ refers to the 
interaction between people or entities from two or more cultures. Theories, concepts 
and techniques will be tested cross-culturally, so that we can see if they are transferable 
to other contexts and hence valid beyond the original application setting.
Towards the integration of terms
The material provided in this book represents the fertile ground of interaction 
between coaching, mentoring and psychology (in particular, learning). This triangular 
relationship can be represented in a simple Venn diagram (see Figure 1.1).
However, as the research and coaching or mentoring journey unfolded, one would 
discover that there are actually increasing overlaps between the three disciplines. Thus 
one could see the three circles of influence in Figure 1.1 gravitating towards each 
other (see Figure 1.2). The next question then becomes clear: How much overlap is 
there between the three disciplines in practice?
The three are in fact interwoven. Chapter 2 shows that coaching and mentoring are 
coming of age. It considers market forces, the development of the coaching/mentoring 
Coaching 
Psychology of
learning
Mentoring
Figure 1.1  The ground of fertile overlap between coaching, mentoring and the psychology 
of learning

4	
The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning
industry and the global market place, and their roles in shaping practice. In order to 
bring the model of coaching/mentoring and psychology of learning to life, the orien-
tation of this book can be rearranged as a three-dimensional (3D) working model (see 
Figure 1.3).
In this model, coaching and mentoring are viewed as an interchangeable con-
tinuum. Sometimes they may even be regarded as the same thing, depending on 
the context. For simplicity, the terms coaching, coach and coachee are used to 
Coaching 
Psychology of
learning
Mentoring
Coaching 
psychology
Figure 1.2  Increasing the area of overlap between coaching, mentoring and the psychology 
of learning
Coaching/mentoring
Psychology of 
learning
Age
Disability
Faith
Sexual  
orientation
Gender
Race
Diversity in 
coaching/mentoring
Figure 1.3  Working with a 3D model of coaching, mentoring and psychology of learning

	
Introduction
5
mean coaching/mentoring, coaches/mentors and coachees/mentees respectively 
(unless their specific meaning is stated explicitly). Whatever the context, due regard 
should be given to the diversity of all participants in this process. This understanding 
extends to their appreciation of sensitivities and of the respect that each one should 
have for the others’ values, beliefs, faith, gender, sexual orientation, social barriers, 
disability, and racial and cultural backgrounds. To understand the universality and 
diversity of coachees within a diverse setting, it is important that coaches learn more 
about the principles and techniques grounded in the psychology of learning and 
applicable across cultures.
Content in a Nutshell
Coaching and mentoring are different disciplines. Organizations and groups have 
been set up specializing in coaching and/or mentoring. These include the Association 
for Coaching, the British Psychological Society’s Special Group in Coaching 
Psychology, the European Mentoring and Coaching Council, and the International 
Coaching Federation (see Chapter 2). Coaches and mentors come from diverse back-
grounds. While you may not need a degree in psychology in order to be a coach and 
a mentor, for coaching and mentoring to be effective, you need to understand the 
psychological principles on which the practice is based. Without this understanding, 
coaches and mentors risk not achieving their intended outcome.
Drawing on the comprehensive literature in the psychology of learning, this book 
focuses on linking theory to practical application. The core principles of positive 
psychology and learning are described in Chapter 3. The same chapter provides a 
literature review as well as highlighting the philosophy of positive psychology and 
the learning theories that are useful in coaching and mentoring practice within the 
tradition of epistemology. (When we refer to epistemology, we mean to question 
the nature of what we know: fundamentally, epistemology asks what knowledge is 
and how we distinguish it from our internal thoughts and beliefs.) Chapter 4 
addresses key definitions of coaching, mentoring and learning, which are grounded 
in the psychology of learning from the previous chapter. Once we revised the 
­psychology of learning and established our own key definitions within the intersect-
ing domains of coaching, mentoring and learning, we set out here on a journey of 
enquiry, and we proceed logically to guide the reader through the chapters that 
follow. Chapter 5 describes how coaching and mentoring can be used as a vehicle 
to help organizations become learning organizations. From the consolidation of 
theory into coaching and mentoring practice in diverse settings, a universal 
integrated framework (UIF) is developed; and its revised version, the integrative 
learning system (ILS), is described in Chapter 6. The major classes of techniques 
and tools are described in Chapter 7. Chapter 8 supplements them with relevant 
practical exercises; I hope readers will find them useful. Chapter 9 provides a 
number  of case studies in terms of the UIF and a reflective learning process to 
­demonstrate that these theories and exercises work in the real world, in various 
organizations as well as in diverse communities. One of the major criticisms of the 
emerging coaching industry is that most theories and practices lack rigorous, evi-
dence-based evaluation. Chapter 10 meets this challenge by providing an impact 

6	
The Psychology of Coaching, Mentoring and Learning
evaluation of the UIF linked to a case study. Finally, Chapter 11 describes perceived 
future directions and work by incorporating the following key themes:
•  matching between coaching/mentoring pairs;
•  coordinator role;
•  emotional intelligence cross-cultural competency;
•  evidence-based research and impact assessment;
•  supervision;
•  training;
•  coaching/mentoring standards, codes of conduct and ethics.
Book Research Approach
Writing this book has been like riding two horses. I would like to ensure that it 
is  easy to read and accessible to a diverse readership without compromising its 
academic rigour. Thus, wherever possible, the writing style is straightforward. 
Academic ­references are only noted at specific points in the text. They reflect the 
wide range of literature reviewed from online sources and the information obtained 
by attending international workshops and conferences – in the UK, Europe, Australia 
and Hong Kong. While the literature review casts the research net very widely, 
it  also focuses on the deliverables that this book represents  – that is, on useful 
guidance for learners and practitioners in the field of coaching psychology, coach-
ing, mentoring and training. Although the UIF developed here is grounded both in 
established psychological theories of learning and in evidence-based evaluation 
for its effectiveness and efficacy, it has been continually refined and revised for this 
new edition.
Why Coaching, Mentoring and Learning?
As globalization leads to more intense competition, organizations need to continue to 
recruit, develop and deploy the best people in order to stay ahead and survive. We 
have seen rapid and unprecedented change in our organizations and communities 
across the globe. This has taken place in the fast-growing communications industry as 
well as in public organizations. Repeated reconfigurations in search of service improve-
ments have meant that leaders are required to work at the furthest bounds of their 
capability. Corporate leaders have begun to realize that traditional training methods 
may not be able to cope with the pace of change. Hence organizations have turned to 
coaching and mentoring to help develop their people, to deepen their talent pool 
and  to enhance their organizational learning capability. Mentoring and coaching 
go beyond industry. Individuals from vulnerable communities need to be channelled 
to effective routes, towards learning in trusted partnerships; isolated groups need a 
mechanism for breaking down barriers and reaching out to mainstream communities; 
and any people who want to learn more about themselves, or increase their knowledge 
in targeted areas and in the wider environment, can benefit.

	
Introduction
7
How to read this book
Owing to the philosophy that underpins this book, the following terms are used 
­interchangeably throughout this book:
•  you and readers;
•  coaches and mentors;
•  coachees and mentees;
•  learners, trainers and supervisors.
Each chapter is intended to be independent in terms of its topic and content. You may 
pick and choose which chapters are relevant to you. Nevertheless, throughout this 
book you will find that the chapters are interwoven, and some are clustered more 
closely around a topic than others at a certain juncture in the coaching journey. It is 
recommended that the chapters be read consecutively in pairs. For example, if you are 
a learner or a student who would like to know more about coaching and mentoring 
and about how they link to the psychology of learning, you should read Chapters 2 
and 3. If you are a busy chief executive or a training manager who wants to find out 
about the relevance of coaching and mentoring to organizations, you may like to 
read Chapter 5. For experienced coaches and mentors wishing to refer directly to the 
techniques and exercises, Chapters 7 and 8 can be read together. Chapter 8 provides 
a things-to-do list for coaching; in addition, the exercises are organized in a systematic 
way, so that readers can refer back to the principles described in Chapter 7. Whether 
you are a beginner or an experienced coach or mentor, you will find these two chap-
ters useful, as they provide pointers for you to begin your continuous professional 
development or to fine-tune what you already know. Readers who are interested in 
concrete examples, case studies and the evidence-based evaluation of coaching and 
mentoring programmes can go directly to Chapters 9 and 10. Throughout the book, 
each chapter highlights, through cross-referencing, concepts and ideas that are inter-
woven. In this way I hope that our ‘conversation’ will provide a sense of continuity as 
the story unfolds and will encourage a dramatic re-engagement with many of your 
experiences that may fill some of the gaps in this book. To help readers apply the the-
ories to reflective practice, each chapter is written to a standard format. It begins with 
an introduction designed to outline its content and ends with a chapter summary and 
reflection, which summarizes the key concepts and reflects on practical implications.
