First Published in The Arts in Psychotherapy, Vol. 23, No, 1, pp, 27-36, 1996  
  
PSYCHODRAMA AND DRAMA THERAPY: A COMPARISON 
 
Efrat Kedem-Tahar and Peter Felix Kellermann  
  
 
 
In therapy, as in all human activity, drama is both inevitable and necessary. It is 
inevitable because, during the human life-cycle, people are constantly confronted with 
dramatic changes and it is necessary because all transitions occur as a result of more 
or less dramatic experiences-in-action. Thus, it is not surprising that drama has been 
used for centuries both within the theatre and in various healing rituals to reflect on 
life. Today, drama is the common source of inspiration for both psychodrama and 
drama therapy. 
  
Basing their philosophies on the fact that life itself is dramatic and that the artistic use 
of drama within the theatre makes much psychological sense, these modern 
approaches to therapy have made use of techniques such as role playing, 
impersonation, enactment and improvisation for the purpose of helping people to deal 
with various aspects of their lives. 
  
However, though psychodrama and drama therapy are based on a common source, 
they are not identical. 
  
Precisely because of their great similarities, they are frequently confused with one 
another and with similar creative action methods. The purpose of the present paper is 
to clearly delineate the actual differences between psychodrama and drama therapy. 
Such a delineation has become increasingly important not only because of the recent 
growth in scope and in number of practitioners in both approaches, but also because 
of the simple fact that presumptive employers, academic investigators, students, 
teachers and clients need to have at least a preliminary idea of the actual discrepancies 
between psychodrama and drama therapy before they choose one instead of the other. 
Furthermore, within the present-day atmosphere of psychotherapy integration, 
commonly agreed upon boundaries of theory and technique would facilitate non-
dogmatic discussion among eclectic practitioners around agreed-upon basic concepts 
regarding the areas or patient populations in which each can contribute to a 
multidimensional approach to psychotherapy. After a brief review of history and a 
discussion of the various definitions, psychodrama and drama therapy will be 
compared from the point of view of theory, practice, target population and therapist 
functions, with conclusions summarized in a comparative overview. The comparison 
is based on a careful review of the literature, extensive personal experience in both 
approaches and interviews carried out with a small but representative sample of 
practitioners from both approaches. 
  
History 
  
Psychodrama was founded by Jacob Levy Moreno in the early 1920s as a theatre 
experiment based on spontaneous improvisations (Blatner & Blatner, 1988; Marineau, 
1989). Having observed how professional actors and children who were engaged in 
role playing exercises felt remarkably revealed by these, Moreno became intrigued by 

the therapeutic potentials and social implications of a completely spontaneous theatre-
--one without a written manuscript and without a separation between actors and 
audience. However, as psychodrama became a more clinical form of group 
psychotherapy, it slowly turned away from experimental theatre and, though initially 
used in a general sense to refer to a variety of role playing activities, it became a more 
specific and structured psychotherapy method, with its first professional society 
founded in 1942. 
  
During the 1960s, around the same time as psychodrama became a more structured 
form of group psychotherapy, drama therapy rediscovered the therapeutic potentials 
of improvisational and spontaneous theatre. Focusing again on the aesthetic qualities 
of drama and on the various influences of Brecht, Stanislavsky, Grotowski and 
Artaud, the early drama therapists remained within the frameworks of experimental 
theatre. Many started out by helping hospitalized mental patients, prisoners and 
students to put on conventional plays that depicted relevant emotional and/ or social 
issues. Recognizing the sometimes subtle but dramatic changes that occurred in the 
participants as a result of this work, they attempted to apply their techniques to new 
populations and transfer them to other settings in which the techniques were further 
modified and expanded to suit various special developmental (Johnson, 1982) and 
expressive needs. The influences of the British approach to "remedial drama" 
(Jennings, 1973), various forms of creative dramatics (Spolin, 1973; Way, 1969), the 
human potential movement and educational theatre schools in the United States 
finally combined to build a more specific drama therapy approach (Emunah, 1994; 
Jennings, 1987; Landy, 1994a; Petitti, 1992; Schattner & Courtney, 1981), which 
emerged as a new profession with its own national society in 1979, almost 40 years 
after its psychodramatic forerunner and counterpart. 
Both societies are today members of the same National Coalition of Arts Therapies 
Associations (NCATA) in the U.S. and there are several common international events 
in which practitioners from both meet and exchange experiences. 
  
Definition 
  
The term" psychodrama," from the Greek "psyche" (soul/spirit) and "drama" (action), 
means presenting the soul in action. Classical, protagonistcentered psychodrama is 
today seen as a method of psychotherapy in which clients are encouraged to continue 
and complete their actions through dramatization, role playing and dramatic self-
presentation. Both verbal and nonverbal communications are utilized. A number of 
scenes are enacted depicting, for example, memories of specific happenings in the 
past, unfinished situations, inner dramas, fantasies, dreams, preparations for future 
risktaking situations or unrehearsed expressions of mental states in the here and now. 
These scenes either approximate real-life situations or are externalizations of more or 
less imaginary inner mental processes. If required, other roles may be taken by group 
members or by inanimate objects (e.g., the "empty chair"). Many techniques are 
employed, such as role reversal, doubling, mirroring, concretizing, maximizing and 
soliloquy. Usually the phases of warm-up, action, working through, closure and 
sharing can be identified, with a post-session processing session following 
(Kellermann, 1992, p. 20) 
  
Although psychodrama is usually practiced in a group setting, its techniques can be 
used also within individual, family, couple, network or milieu therapy and, with 
various modifications, as a method for exploring social conflicts ("sociodrama"). As 

so defined, psychodrama should be clearly differentiated from general role playing, 
sociometry, group psychotherapy, encounter groups and other related forms of action 
approaches, including drama therapy. 
  
Drama therapy, or "dramatherapy" as it is written in the UK, is more difficult to 
define in a concise manner, succinctly expressed by McNiff (1986) who noted, "I 
know what is not psychodrama, but sometimes I do not know what is drama therapy" 
(cited in Petitti, 1992, p. 42). An obvious reason for this difficulty in defining drama 
therapy is its emphasis on spontaneity, creativity and play which, by necessity, leaves 
a lot of freedom for experimentation and change. However, it seems that drama 
therapy lately also has evolved into a more systematic and carefully controlled 
approach for exploring emotional issues through dramatic action (Emunah, 1994). 
Vaguely describing drama therapy as an extension of the natural play of children 
(Langley, 1983), Johnson (1984) stated that the term "drama therapy" should be more 
specifically used for' 'those approaches which stress the appreciation of creative 
theater as a medium for self-expression and playful group interaction and which base 
their techniques on improvisation and theater exercises" (p. 105). Most practitioners 
probably agree that drama therapy refers to the utilization of dramatic methods in 
group situations, usually for the general purposes of promoting healing intrinsic to 
theatre art, developing skills of improvisation and creative thinking, expanding the 
repertoire of roles with the inclusion of body movement and other aesthetic 
dimensions. From a technical point of view, drama therapists use a wide range of 
exercises built on music, movement, sound, mime, physical relaxation, narratives, 
guided daydreaming, imagery and play. 
  
Often, various stage props, such as dolls, masks, costumes, make-up and inanimate 
objects, are used as imaginary stimulation for dramatization of stories and myths, 
detailed improvisation of situations or the enactment and exploration of classical (e.g., 
Greek or Shakespearan) texts. Role playing sessions may become imaginary journeys 
on themes that are preconstructed or created on the spot by the participants. 
  
Much emphasis is put on the ritual realm of healing ceremonies and on various 
cultural modes of expression. Throughout, drama therapy is process- rather than 
outcome-oriented, progressing through various stages. But there is generally no final 
play performed in front of an audience. 
  
A main controversy within and between both psychodrama and drama therapy 
concerns the delineation of art and of psychotherapy. Though prominent practitioners 
of both camps firmly state that their approach is a form of art and not a method of 
psychotherapy, others maintain the opposite view. Bentley's (1977) discussion of the 
connections (and distinctions) between drama as therapy and drama as entertainment 
is still highly relevant. This controversy is most outspoken within drama therapy, in 
which Jennings (1990) and Langley (1983) seemed to pull toward the artistic side of 
the dichotomy, stating that drama therapy is an "art form" (albeit with therapeutic 
potential). Jennings (1990, p. 9) and Johnson (1984) pulled toward the other side, 
stating that" drama therapy, like the other creative arts therapies (art, music and 
dance), is the application of a creative medium to psychotherapy" (p. 105). Jennings' 
(1986) categorization of three different approaches or "modes" of drama therapy----
creative/expressive, task centered and psychotherapeutic/insight-oriented-is another 
way of looking at this controversy. Similarly, Landy's (1994b) recent prediction of 
three possible scenarios for the future of drama therapy-----one as a part of theatre, the 

second as a part of psychology and the third as part of the expressive/creative arts 
therapists-indicates the ambivalence of drama therapists regarding which club to join. 
Within psychodrama, Moreno (1972) refused to separate art and therapy from the 
very beginning, characterizing psychodrama variously as a theology, a political 
system, a science and/or as a way of life, thus making it impossible for anyone to 
compartmentalize psychodrama into a specific field. 
  
Without a clear definition of what we mean by the ambiguous terms art and 
psychotherapy, the above semantic discussion becomes meaningless. Obviously, art 
does not convey simply aesthetics, and psychotherapy is certainly not just 
psychological treatment (Szasz, 1974). As the Jungian psychodramatist Barz (1994) 
pointed out, "Good therapy must always-among other things-also be good theatre. 
  
And good theatre is always archetypical, liberating both the individual and the social 
components of the person" (p. 12). Therefore, instead of characterizing psychodrama 
and drama therapy simply as art and/or as psychotherapy, it would, of course, be more 
constructive to try to delineate their respective aims, purposes and underlying basic 
philosophies. 
  
Viewed from this perspective, we have found that there is a fundamental difference 
between psychodrama and drama therapy. It seems that whereas in psychodrama the" 
soul" (psyche) is the aim and the "action" (drama) is the means, the opposite is true 
for drama therapy in which drama itself (as pure art) is the aim and the psyche is the 
means (of expression). 
This is much more than a purely semantic difference; it is a difference in basic 
philosophy. 
  
Theory 
  
Most psychodramatists refer to the classical formulations of J. L. Moreno (1972) 
when asked to provide a rationale for their work. "Psychodrama's scientific roots are 
buried deep in Moreno's philosophies of spontaneity, creativity, the moment, and 
theories of role and interaction" (Yablonsky & Enneis, 1956, p. 149). Moreno's 
theories on role taking and role playing, spontaneity-creativity, sociometry, social 
atom, tele and catharsis are clearly indispensable for any understanding of 
psychodrama. However, though these theories may explain many clinical situations, 
some practitioners feel that they fail to provide a sufficiently uniform and 
comprehensive theoretical structure for psychodrama. They prefer, therefore, to 
justify their practice with the help of theories adapted from psychodynamic, social, 
behavioral or humanistic psychology. Others feel most comfortable within an 
integrative framework that tries to join together the best of two or more separate 
approaches into one broad multimodal conceptual framework. There has lately been a 
number of important contributions to the theory of psychodrama as clinical role 
playing (Kipper, 1986), strategic family therapy (Williams, 1989) and inspirational 
technique (Holmes & Karp, 1991), and from the point of view of its therapeutic 
aspects (Kellermann, 1992), object relations theory (Holmes, 1992) and innovations 
in theory and practice (Holmes, Karp & Watson, 1994), to mention just a few of the 
recent books written in English. 
  
Drama therapy presently lacks a systematic, coherent theory of its own and most 
practitioners seem to use techniques without any firm theoretical basis. Unlike 

psychodrama, "drama therapy does not refer to a specific theory or technique 
generated by one person', (Johnson, 1984, p. 107). Moreover, when talking to drama 
therapists, many seem to be decidedly antitheoretical, having a clear preference for 
spontaneous action, play and the expression of feelings at the expense of critical 
questioning and theory building. This attitude is in great contrast to some of the 
founders of drama therapy (e.g., Sue Jennings) who are prolific writers contributing 
much to its theoretical development. Apart from the obvious early literature by 
Artaud, Brecht and Stanislavsky, contemporary handbooks of drama therapy have 
been written by Chesner (1994), Emunah (1994) and by Grainger (1990) who 
explained the roots of drama therapy from the point of view of rituals (Scheff, 1979) 
and personal construct theory (Kelly, 1955). Landy (1994a) explained both the roots 
of drama therapy and offered the theoretical positions in the field. Landy's (1993) 
book on the meaning of role in drama therapy and in everyday life stands out as the 
main recent contribution to this growing knowledge. Although much work remains to 
be done in the field of theory building, there has lately been an encouraging 
development of quality textbooks in drama therapy theory (e.g., Chesner, 1995; 
Gersie, 1995; Mitchell, 1995). 
  
Practice 
  
From a practical perspective, psychodrama and drama therapy may be compared with 
one another from the point of view of their different employment of (a) imagination 
and reality, (b) cognitive integration and processing, (c) individual focusing and (d) 
the use of specific techniques. 
  
First, although both approaches deliberately activate the imagination of participants 
through the employment of various as-if maneuvers, drama therapy remains largely in 
this realm whereas psychodrama touches upon both reality and surplus reality during 
the course of one session. Drama itself is, of course, 
metaphorical action and, indeed, most material presented in both approaches have 
symbolic meaning. 
  
The use of imagination helps people disclose private parts of themselves that they 
would not confront directly. Thus, dramatic distancing (Jennings, 1990; 
Landy, 1983) and" as-if" (Kellermann, 1992) paradoxically give a feeling of safety 
because it is only a game while at the same time bringing people closer to themselves 
and revealing unconscious material spontaneousl y in action. In the words of Emunah 
(1994), "The scenes in drama therapy are not necessarily directly related to people's 
real life experiences. Rather, drama therapy utilizes far more improvisation of 
fictional scenes, capitalizing on the notion that to play and to pretend enables a sense 
of freedom and permission, and promotes expression and selfrevelation, albeit 
obliquely" (p. 18). 
  
Whereas in psychodrama, such a focus on imaginary material, presented in a freely 
associative manner, is either used in the beginning phase of the classical process or in 
the separate forms of surrealistic, symbolic, or "dream-reenactment" procedures, in 
drama therapy it is the actual substance of action. 
Subsequently, participants in psychodrama are encouraged to reenact a scene from 
their actual lives that they suddenly remembered as a result of their imaginary 
experience whereas drama therapists often discourage such identification with a 
metaphor. A reason for this reluctance to connect imagination with reality was 

explained in the following manner, "We believe that the metaphor is the treatment 
itself and we do not think that we can find out what is hiding behind the metaphor in 
only one session, a process matter to be done by the participants themselves." 
According to Jennings (1990, p. 20), this difference is due to the fact that 
psychodrama generally emphasizes personal emotional involvement whereas drama 
therapy emphasizes dramatical distancing (Landy, 1983)-a polarity resembling the 
opposing viewpoints of Stanislavsky who emphasized involvement and Brecht who 
emphasized distance. Though such a polarization may have a certain heuristic value, 
we feel that it is highly simplified and suggest that any dramatic approach to therapy 
must include both involvement and distance, both imaginary and real phenomena, and 
that the aim should be not to choose one instead of the other, but to find a proper 
balance between them. 
  
Second, though both approaches put a lot of emphasis on emotional experience, 
psychodramatists seem to encourage much more cognitive integration than drama 
therapists do. This may be done, for example, through action-insight, verbalization, 
processing and direct or indirect analysis of the material expressed. Contrarywise, 
some drama therapists minimize cognitive reflection as much as possible. When asked 
about this sometimes complete absence of emphasis on understanding, one drama 
therapist simply stated that "there is no need for it! All required understanding comes 
from the dramatization itself. " Although this might not be standard practice for all 
drama therapists (cf., Landy's [1993J phase of "reflection upon the role play, 
integrating roles to create a functional life system, and social modeling"), it seems that 
whereas in drama therapy the expression has value in itself, psychodrama emphasizes 
the importance of connecting experiences with awareness. 
  
Perhaps this was exaggerated in Chesner' s (1994) observation that "dramatherapy 
may take place under cover of relative darkness while psychodrama tends to shine a 
torch of conscious awareness into the dark recesses of the psyche" (p. 129). 
Third, though both approaches deal with issues that concern the entire group, 
individual issues are less emphasized in drama therapy than in psychodrama. 
Individual issues are pursued in psychodrama through the choice and re-enactments of 
one protagonist, the central figure who is usually absent in drama therapy. In drama 
therapy, all group members associate with the presented issue and transform it into a 
common story, play or myth that they can all participate in. 
  
Drama therapy techniques are viewed by psychodramatists as initiations to sessions, 
as stimulating warm-ups for the entire group to catalyze creative processes (Blatner & 
Blatner, 1988; Chesner, 1994). "The graded series of exercises extends the 'warmup' 
through many sessions and at the same time strengthens protagonists' egos, which 
help prepare them for deeper, more insight-oriented work (i.e., psychodrama)" 
(Blatner in Emunah, 1994, p. vii). 
Indeed, drama therapy exercises have been included in the vast collection of warm-up 
exercises that contemporary psychodramatists use in their groups (most notably 
Blatner, Sternberg, Garcia, Fox & Leveton, according to Emunah, 1994, p. 19). If an 
entire session deals with the exploration of one of these exercises, without focusing on 
an individual protagonist, it is called "group-centered" or "theme-centered" 
psychodrama, sometimes developed into a sociodrama (Sternberg & Garcia, 1989), 
the exploration of common social roles and conflicts. Drama therapy remains in this 
universal realm for the entire session, searching for archetypal experiences. For 
example, when Jennings (1990) brought a Greek play, such as Antigone, to her drama 

therapy group for exploration, she intentionally did not focus on any individual real 
life situation, but on the universal father-daughter and sister relations in a distanced 
scenario and the participants agreed not to interpret anything in relation to their own 
families. This would, of course, be very unlikely within classical, protagonist-centered 
psychodrama. 
  
Another example is their different uses of masks. 
In drama therapy, masks are usually explored from a more aesthetic and non-
psychological perspective; participants learn to prepare them, try them out, play with 
them in various roles and finally talk about how they felt doing all this. In 
psychodrama, participants may start out doing the same, but, at one point, or another, 
the psychodramatist will start asking highly personal, individual questions of the 
participants about their masks and the' 'persona" they put on in their daily lives. They 
may ask, "Who are you behind this mask?" And, "Who is behind that one? What is 
the most private part that you cannot share with anyone? Who are you most ashamed 
of? Why? Can you tell him or her? Why not? What would happen if you did? Would 
you like to try? Let's do it now! Show us! . . . " And later, , , Would you consider 
taking off your mask-have a different one?" Some psychodramatists would also take 
the opportunity to explore some of the interpersonal aspects of such a 
groupmasquerade, asking the participants to explore for whom they put on their 
masks, how they want other people to see them and how they actually feel toward one 
another, leading the group into a sociometric exploration. Thus, while in psychodrama 
questions are often asked in a direct, confrontative but hopefully sensitive manner, 
drama therapy lets the participants deal with the same issues in a more subtle and 
indirect manner, leaving much of the actual individual processing to the participants 
themselves. 
  
Fourth, psychodrama and drama therapy use specific dramatic techniques very 
differently. There is not only a general difference in the use of such instruments as 
scene setting, putting actors in role, enactment and sharing, but also in the therapeutic 
employments of role reversal, doubling, soliloquy, mirroring and concretization. 
Although in psychodrama, these techniques are used to advance some kind of intra- 
and/or interpersonal working through of issues and problems raised during the session 
through catharsis, action-insight, interpersonal or behavioral learning, drama therapy 
is much less focused and structured in the uses of such specific techniques, generally 
emphasizing expression in itself as the main medium. 
  
A suitable illustration of this difference is the technique of the "empty chair," which is 
used frequently in both approaches. In drama therapy, a mother who reveals that she 
has difficulties with her adolescent son may be asked to imagine that her son is sitting 
in front of her and that she is talking to him. She may express and reveal whatever 
pent-up feelings she has kept in toward her son when talking to the empty chair and 
that would complete the work of the drama therapist. A psychodramatist would 
probably continue the session, putting an auxiliary (representing the absent person) on 
the empty chair, suggest role reversal and doubling to work through and resolve the 
often complicated relations between adolescents and their parents, thus hoping to 
clarify and untangle some of the inner representations and actual perceptions one has 
of the other. 
  
Target Population 
  

One possible consequence of the above differences is that drama therapy and 
psychodrama may be suitable for different target populations. Some practitioners 
from both camps claim that their method is the treatment of choice for all mental 
disorders whereas others state that their method can be helpful only for specific 
populations, most of which cannot even be labeled with psychiatric diagnoses. As 
empirical outcome research has been consistently neglected in both psychodrama and 
drama therapy, there is yet no conclusive evidence behind any of the above claims. 
Because of limited scope and reliability, the more than 200 empirical research reports 
that have been published on actional role play methods (Schramski & Feldman, 1984) 
are insufficient to objectively substantiate their therapeutic effects. 
  
It is our experience that drama therapy and psychodrama can be suitable only for 
people who are able to enter into the exhausting psychic rituals of a dramatic setting. 
The ability, for example, to participate in the imaginary process of role playing 
without losing touch with outer reality seems to be a minimal requirement in both 
approaches. For example, people who are too mentally rigid, introverted and 
unspontaneous, usually will have great difficulties in such groups. This may be 
somewhat surprising as they are the very people who would have most to gain from 
drama and who are often referred to nonverbal approaches because of their difficulties 
to make progress in verbal therapy. 
  
Both psychodrama and drama therapy have shown potential applications in certain 
client populations and within various settings, either by themselves or as adjuncts to 
the more traditional approaches to therapy. Though it would be impossible to mention 
all settings where these approaches could be applied, the most common are probably 
psychiatric hospitals (Emunah, 1983; Polansky & Harkins, 1969), outpatient clinics, 
prisons, schools, universities, old age homes and in personnel management. Drama 
therapists have recently documented their work with clinical studies of a great variety 
of patients, including acute or chronic inpatients, various groups of outpatients, 
children and adolescents, addicts, the eating disordered, post traumatic stress 
disordered, personality disordered and survivors of sexual abuse (Gersie, 1995; 
Jennings, 1995; Mitchell, 1995; Winn, 1994). 
  
Clearly, most of the main target populations are similar, but some groups seem to be 
more suitable to one approach than the other. For example, drama therapy may be the 
treatment of choice for certain disorders first evident in infancy, childhood and 
adolescence, including some developmental disorders, mental retardation, autism and 
conduct disorders in which communication is more nonverbal. Drama therapy also 
seems suitable for those with learning disabilities (Chesner, 1995) and with physically 
handicapped people (Irwin, 1979) within a rehabilitation and occupational therapy 
framework. With some of these populations, drama therapy can be more flexibly 
adjusted than psychodrama to suit various levels of communication and awareness 
with the possible use of simple drama exercises such as movement and play. On the 
other hand, psychodrama is probably indicated for alcoholics and drug addicts who 
need a more direct and confrontational approach to psychotherapy, apart from the 
expressive focus. 
Paradoxically, psychodrama may be viewed as more suitable for people who are both 
more healthy and more ill than participants in drama therapy. From the point of view 
of psychopathology, protagonists may be more severely ill in various psychiatric 
disorders, but more healthy in certain mental functions including ego strength and 
ordinary sensory perception. For example, the use of "representational" role reversal 

(Kellermann, 1994), doubling and mirroring is impossible with a group of chronic 
psychiatric inpatients and mentally retarded children. The ability to participate in 
psychodrama is not only dependent on a certain degree of intellectual, imaginary, 
emotional and interpersonal functioning, but also on role taking and role playing 
skills, which are insufficiently developed in many persons. Furthermore, protagonists 
must be able to experience surges of feelings without a loss of impulse control, have 
at least some capacity to establish interpersonal relations, have a minimal tolerance 
for anxiety and frustration, some psychological-mindedness and a capacity for 
adaptive regression in the service of the ego (Kellermann, 1992, p. 23). In the final 
analysis, psychodrama seems to be especially suitable for some of the conditions that 
are not normally attributable to a mental disorder, but that are nevertheless a focus of 
treatment, to speak in the language of DSM-IV. Such conditions would include 
various relational problems within and outside the family, phase of life circumstances 
and uncomplicated bereavements that may be the results of developmental, traumatic 
or transitional crises rather than a developmental deficiency. 
  
Most non-clinical psychodramatists and drama therapists shun diagnoses. Psychiatric 
disorders, they say, are a product of social forces that operate upon people in a self-
fulfilling manner, and people who are labeled and treated as if they were disturbed, 
increasingly become more disturbed and later permanently adopt the role of mentally 
ill. Such practitioners do not have a conception of health, normality or pathology; 
diagnosis is therefore irrelevant and unnecessary. Their kind of work is not" therapy" 
in the medical sense of the word, but an emotional experience within the framework 
of developmental play. 
This experience mayor may not make people more balanced, more happy, less 
neurotic or more aware of themselves. In any case, the goal is not to produce a "cure," 
but simply to become as creative, spontaneous and expressive as possible within the 
boundaries of each individual's personal limitations. By definition, the discrepancy 
between this activity (whether we call it drama therapy or psychodrama) and play in 
general is almost nonexistent. 
  
The goals of clinical psychodramatists and drama therapists are generally more 
specific. Participants in these approaches want to get rid of symptoms, handle difficult 
situations better, get through their mourning, let out pent-up anger, remember and 
work through forgotten traumatic experiences from the past and/or gain in personal 
self-esteem. Discussion and disagreement between clinical and non-clinical uses of 
drama prevail across camps. 
  
Therapist Functions 
  
Though some of the roles and functions of psychodramatists and drama therapists 
overlap, others are slightly different or incompatible. Both approaches demand 
extensive personal and professional experience and usually attract people with great 
extraversion, spontaneous enthusiasm and histrionic inventiveness. Clearly, anyone 
working within a dramatic approach must have sufficient flexibility to permit rapid 
changes of mode to meet variable individual and group needs on the spur of the 
moment. 
  
Psychodramatists fulfill four interrelated and highly complex tasks. First, as analysts, 
they are responsible for making themselves fully aware of the protagonist's condition. 
This includes understanding both personal and interpersonal phenomena in order to 

attribute meaning to emotional experiences. Second, as producers, psychodramatists 
are theatre directors translating the material presented into action that is emotionally 
stimulating and aesthetically pleasant. 
  
Third, as therapists, they are agents of change who influence their protagonists in 
ways that facilitate healing. Fourth, as group leaders, they foster a constructive work 
group climate that facilitates the development of a supportive social network. The 
overlapping and interlacing of these various roles form the basis of the 
psychodramatist's professional identity (Kellermann, 1992). 
Drama therapists function mostly as theatre producers, including the roles of 
dramaturg, artist, leaders of ritual and teachers of drama. Many practitioners bring 
with them unique experiences from the fields of art, acting, occupational and 
expressive therapy, social work, anthropology, nursing, special education, psychology 
and creative drama to put a very individualized touch to their (varied) drama therapist 
roleperception. They are usually familiarized with artistic media of expression and put 
a lot of emphasis on aesthetic qualities. Emunah (1989) observed that "the fact that 
drama therapy students enter the program with a strong background in theatre further 
contributes to the high aesthetic level of the scenes" (p. 30). 
  
Both psychodramatists and drama therapists refuse to be lumped together with others 
of their kind. Many of them are essentially individualists, non-joiners and charismatic 
figures with a personalized style of their own. But their kinship with other 
practitioners is real enough. Like psychotherapists, they try to understand and help 
people who suffer from emotional distress and, like dramatists, they share a 
fascination with action and have developed an aesthetic, romantic and sometimes 
escapist approach to life and nature. 
  
Concluding Comparison 
  
Jenning's (1973) comparison of psychodrama and drama therapy along two 
continuous lines depicting both of them in terms of more or less therapeutic depth and 
symbolic distance (Davies, 1975) seems still to be largely valid. Putting both 
approaches on the same continuum, we would add that drama therapy, as it is 
practiced today, is oriented specifically toward creative-expressive learning of roles 
whereas psychodrama is oriented more toward experiential learning, including 
specific working through of emotional, cognitive, interpersonal, behavioral and 
nonspecific issues. Some of the other differences are presented in the comparative 
overview in Table I. 
It seems to us that because of the explicit focus on distancing and the frequent use of 
metaphors, drama therapy stays more on the surface of material (which does not 
necessarily mean that it is more' 'superficial") and makes it "safer" than the 
psychodramatic approach of deep penetration of the soul. As a result, both cuisines 
are more easily digested by different diners. Blatner and Blatner (1988) correctly 
pointed out that "in some settings the "psycho-" or the "-drama" have unpleasant or 
misleading connotations (p. 7), and "drama therapy complements psychodrama for 
those who are not ready to directly address the emotionally loaded issues in their real 
lives" (Blatner in Emunah, 1994, p. vii). Thus, although drama therapy may be 
perceived as more stimulating, entertaining and "fun" in some educational settings, 
psychodrama is not so easily accepted in such settings because of the personal self-
disclosure required. 
  

Discussion 
  
Naturally, any comparison of methods that are continually changing is a difficult task. 
Being based on spontaneity-creativity, psychodrama and drama therapy defy clear 
boundaries and operational definitions. As a result, any comparison quickly becomes 
erratic and/or obsolete, as eloquently pointed out by 
  
Table 1 
  
Comparative Overview of Psychodrama and Drama Therapy 
  
  
Psychodrama 
Drama Therapy 
Definition 
  
Group 
psychotherapy 
Psyche (aim) 
drama (means) 
Expressive art 
therapy 
Drama (aim) 
psyche (means) 
Theory 
  
J.L. Moreno and 
others 
Spontaneity-
creativity 
Role; sociometry, 
social psychology, 
object relations 
theory, behavioral 
learning 
No one “founder” 
Theatre theory 
Anthropology and 
ritual 
Role and play 
therapy 
Expression 
Jungian psychology 
Aims 
  
Therapeutic 
Self-awareness 
Involvement 
Aesthetic 
Expression 
Distance 
Therapeutic 
Factors 
  
Catharsis 
Tele 
Action-insight 
As-if 
Magic 
Play 
Improvisation 
Distancing 
Rituals 
Group work 
Practice 
  
Clear structure 
Imagination and 
reality 
Cognitive 
Integration 
Focus on 
Individual 
Specific techniques 
Unclear structure 
Imagination, myth 
No processing 
Focus on group 
No specific 
techniques 
Target population 
  
Conflicts 
Life Crises 
Psychological 
minded 
Developmental 
deficiencies, 
handicapped, 
retarded 
Therapist 
functions 
  
Analyst, producer, 
therapist, group 
leader 
Dramaturg, teacher, 
artist, shaman 
  
  

Jennings (1990) who said that "no dramatherapy treatise can be definitive for more 
than a blink of a gazelle's eye" (p. 26). This is, of course, true also of the present 
work. The fact that practitioners who call themselves psychodramatists or drama 
therapists cannot accept others who claim the same titles, does not make the situation 
easier. Clearly, as both approaches are practiced differently in various places around 
the world, a comparison such as the present one is at best a plausible view of the 
moment. 
  
One characteristic indication of this ambiguity is that drama therapists view 
psychodrama as a part of drama therapy whereas the opposite is true for 
psychodramatists. As many drama therapists use psychodramatic techniques as a 
follow-up when indicated and many psychodramatists use drama therapy techniques 
as a warm-up, the question of which approach is a part of the other becomes 
meaningless. Moreover, "group-centered" psychodrama, an approach that is more or 
less similar to drama therapy, has been used for years with people who are unsuitable 
or unmotivated to participate in protagonist-centered psychodrama. Finally, there are 
few drama therapy methods that were not experimentally used within the Moreno 
Institute under a variety of such names as "bibliodrama," "axiodrama," or spontaneity 
training. 
  
Prominent drama therapists, such as Landy (1994a), recognize that psychodrama 
provided drama therapists with both a theoretical source and a series of techniques. 
"That psychodrama has been a fundamental part of the work of most drama therapists 
goes without saying" (Emunah, 1994, p. 19). Thus, both methods may be viewed as 
different branches of one and the same tree; both developed from the works of J. L. 
Moreno, "the grandfather of all action therapies" (Johnson, 1991, p. 1). 
  
Instead of discussing which approach is a part of the other, it is more important to 
highlight some of the characteristic frustrations that some practitioners feel regarding 
the shortcomings of their own approach. 
For example, some drama therapists feel that by staying only within the symbolic 
realm, though momentarily exciting, will keep participants from "anchoring" their 
experiences in actual (outer or inner) reality. On the other hand, some 
psychodramatists feel that by using specific cognitive distance techniques (such as 
mirroring) too frequently, though momentarily thought-provoking, will keep 
participants from acting spontaneously, improvising freely and exploring unknown 
territory. Thus, it appears that each approach may have something to offer the other in 
terms of complementarity, as Blatner suggested in his Foreword to Emunah (1994). It 
is our view, however, that practitioners working within such an integrative model of 
"psycho-drama-therapy" should be able to clearly differentiate between one and the 
other from the point of view of theory, practice, therapist functions and therapeutic 
factors and to be able to specify what works best for whom within what setting. It is 
our hope that the present work will make this job of differentiation a little bit easier. 
  
References 
  
Barz, H. (1994). Foreword. In W. Scategni, Das psychodrama - zwischen alltaglicher 
und archetypischer erfahrungswelt. Dusseldorf: Walter. 
Bentley, E. (l977). Theatre and therapy. In W. Anderson (Ed.), Therapy and the arts: 
Tools of consciousness. New York: 
Harper & Row. 

Blatner, A., & Blatner A. (1988). Foundations of psychodrama: History, theory & 
practice. New York: Springer. 
Chesner, A. (1994). The handbook of dramatherapy. London: Routledge. 
Chesner, A. (1995). Dramatherapy for people with learning disabilities. London: 
Jessica Kingsley. 
Davies, M. H. (1975). Drama therapy and psychodrama, (Ch. 5). In S. Jennings (Ed.), 
Creative therapy. Banbury: Kemble Press. 
Emunah, R. (1983). Drama therapy with adult psychiatric patients. The Arts in 
Psychotherapv, 10, 77-84. 
Emunah, R. (1989). The use of dramatic enactment in the training of drama therapists. 
The Arts in Psychotherapy, 16, 29-36. 
Emunah. R. (l994). Acting for real: Drama therapy process, technique, and 
performance. New York: Brunner/Maze!. 
Gersie, A. (Ed.), (1995). Dramatic approaches to brief therapy. London: Jessica 
Kingsley. 
Grainger. R. (1990). Drama and healing: The roots of drama therapy. London: Jessica 
Kingsley. 
Holmes, P. (1992). The inner world outside: Object relations theory and 
psychodrama. London: Routledge. 
Holmes, P., & Karp, M. (Eds.). (1991). Psychodrama: Inspiration and technique. 
London: Tavistock - Routledge. 
Holmes, P., Karp, M., & Watson, M. (Eds.). (1994). Psychodrama since Moreno: 
Innovations in theory and practice. London: Routledge. 
Irwin. E. (1979). Drama therapy with the handicapped. In A. Shaw & c. Stevens 
(Eds.), Drama, theatre, alld the handicapped. 
Washington, DC: American Theatre Association. 
Jennings, S. (1973). Remedial drama. London: A & C Black. 
Jennings, S. (l986). Creative drama ill group work. Bicester: Winslow Press. 
Jennings, S. (Ed.). (1987). Dramatherapv: Theory and practice. London: Routledge. 
Jennings, S. (1990). Dramatherapy with families, groups and individuals. London: 
Jessica Kingsley. 
Jennings, S. (Ed.). (1995). Dramatherapy with children and adolesce11ls. London: 
Routledge. 
Johnson, D. R. (1982). Developmental approaches in drama therapy. The Arts ill 
Psychotherapy, 9, 183-190. 
Johnson. D. R. (1984). The field of drama therapy. Journal of Me11lalimagerv, 7, 
105-109. 
Johnson, D. R. (l991). On being one and many. The Arts ill Psychotherapy, 18, 1-5. 
Kellermann, P. F. (1992). Focus On psychodrama: Therapeutic aspects of 
psychodrama. London: Jessica Kingsley. 
Kellermann, P. F. (1994). Cornerstones of role reversal: Role reversal in 
psychodrama. In P. Holmes, M. Karp, & M. Watson (Eds.), Psvchodrama since 
Moreno: Innovations in theory and practice. London: Routledge. 
Kelly, G. A. (1955). The psychology of personal constructs. New York: Norton. 
Kipper, D. A. (1986). Psychotherapy through clinical role playing. New York: 
Brunner/Maze!. 
Landy, R. (1983). The use of distancing in drama therapy. The Arts in Psvchotherapy, 
10, 175-185. 
Landy, R. (1993). Persona and performance: The meaning of role in drama therapy 
and in everyday life. New York: Guilford. 

Landy, R. (l994a). Dramatherapv: Concepts, theories and practices. (2nd ed.). 
Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas. 
Landy, R. (1994b). Three scenarios for the future of drama therapy. The Arts in 
Psychotherapv. 21, 179-184.  
Langley, D. M. (1983). Drama therapy in psychiatry. London: Croom-Helm. 
Marineau, R. F. (1989). Jacob Levy Moreno 1889-1974. London: Tavistock 
Routledge. 
McNiff, S. (1986). Educating the creative arts therapist. Springfield, II: Charles C 
Thomas. 
Mitchell, S. (Ed.). (1995). Dramatherapy: Clinical studies. London: Jessica Kingsley. 
Moreno, J. L. (1972). Psychodrama (Vol. I), New York: Beacon House. 
Moreno, Z. T. (1965), Psychodramatic rules, techniques, and adjunctive methods. 
Group Psychotherapy, IS, 73-86. 
Petitti, G. (1992). Brief report: The operational components of drama therapy. Journal 
of Group Psychotherapy, Psychodrama & Sociometry, 45, 40-44. 
Polansky, N. A., & Harkins, E. B. (1969). Psychodrama as an element in hospital 
treatment. Psychiatry. 32. 74-87. 
Schattner, G., & Courtney, R. (Eds.). (1981). Drama in therapv (Vols. I & 2). New 
York: Drama Book Specialists. 
Scheff, T. J. (1979). Catharsis in healing, ritual, and drama. Los Angeles: University 
of California Press. 
Schramski, T. G., & Feldman, C. A. (1984). Selected abstracts of outcome research 
and evaluation in the action methods. Unpublished manuscript, Tucson Center for 
Psychodrama. 
Spolin, V. (1973). Improvisationfor theatre. London: Pitman. 
Sternberg, P., & Garcia, A. (1989). Sociodrama: Who's in your shoes? New York: 
Praeger. 
Szasz, T. (1974). The myth of psychotherapy. American Journal of Psychotherapy, 
2S, 517-526. 
Way, B. (1969). Development through drama. New York: Barnes & Noble. 
Williams, A. (1989). The passionate technique: Strategic psychodrama with 
individuals, families and groups. New York: Routledge. 
Winn, L. (1994). Post-traumatic stress disorder and dramatherapy. London: Jessica 
Kingsley. 
Yablonsky, L., & Enneis, J. M. (1956). Psychodrama thcory and practice. In F. 
Fromm-Reichmann & J. L. Moreno (Eds.), Progress in psvchotherapy (Vol. 1). New 
York: Grune & Stratton.  
 
