
Acting-ln
3rd Edition

Adam Blatner, MD, TER is a board-certi-
fied child and adult psychiatrist, a Fellow of
the American Psychiatric Association, a cer-
tified trainer of psychodrama, and the
author of numerous books, chapters, and
articles on psychodrama and related meth-
ods. He has become internationally recog-
nized as a teacher and scholar, recently
receiving the David Kipper Scholar's
Award of the American Society for Group
Psychotherapy and Psychodrama.
He received his BA from the University of California at Berkeley
in 1959 and his MD from the University of California Medical
School in San Francisco in 1963. His specialty training included a
residency in adult and child psychiatry at the Stanford Medical
Center in Palo Alto and a fellowship in child and family psychia-
try at the Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles. Dr. Blatner
then served as the medical director of the child psychiatry division
of the U.S. Air Force regional hospital in England. On returning to
California in L972 he began private practice in the San Francisco
Bay area. Since then he has been on the staff of the Brown Schools
in Texas, the Menninger Foundation in Topeka, and more recently
was on the faculty of the University of Louisville (Kentucky)
School of Medicine, where he attained the rank of Associate
Professor. At present he is on the clinical faculty of the Austin
Psychiatric Residency Program and is consulting, writing and
teaching in Austin, Texas.

Acting-In
Practi cal Applications of
Psychodrarnatic Methods
Third Edition
Adarn Blatner, MD
E
SpnrNcen PusLrsHrNG ConapeNy


To David and Alisa, my son and daughter,
whose natural childhood play helped me understand
Moreno's insights regarding spontaneity and creativity.

Contents
Foreword to the First Edition
Preface to the Third Edition
Introduction
I 
The Basic Elements of Psychodrama
2 The Auxiliary
3 The Double
4 Warming-Up
5 The Action
5 Integration: Behavioral Practice, Sharing
and Closing
7 Principles and Pitfalls
8 Applications of Psychodramatic Methods
9 Theoretical Issues
10 The Training of the Psychodramatist
11 A Brief History of Psychodrama
Bibliography
Appendixes
Index
tx
xt
xrn
1
1,6
28
42
64
95
110
124
144
161
777
187
199
203
Ylt

Foreword to the First Edition
In 1921, I created psychodrama out of the earlier work I did with
group psychotherapy, sociometry, and improvisatory theatre.
Since then I have written numerous books and scores of articles on
the subject. Dr. Blatner's book, Acting-ltr, will be a good adjunct to
my writings. This is an excellent work on the subject.
I am especially pleased that Dr. Blatner notes the theological
basis of the method of psychodrama.
I have always tried to show that my approach was meant as much
more than a psychotherapeutic method-my ideas have empha-
sized that crcatiuity and sportfnrrcity affect the very roots of aitality
and spiritual development, and thus affect our involvements in
every sphere of our lives. Furthermore, I have always wanted to
have people attend to the processes of health, as well as to the prob-
lems of illness; thus I am glad Dr. Blatner has noted the applications
of psychodrama in the home, school, and world of business.
When I first met Dr. Blatner in 1968, he was a resident in psy-
chiatry at Stanford University. At that time he showed me a col-
lection of writings by others in the field of psychodrama, along
with a few additions of his own-a syllabus he had assembled
entitled "PracticalAspects of Psychodrama." I encouraged him to
continue his interest in psychodrama and to do more of his own
writing. Apparently, he has taken my advice.
I am further pleased with the different audiences to whom this
book can be addresse.d: for those who are interested in learning
about psychodrama, it can be an introduction; for those who are
practitioners, these materials can comprise a useful handbook; and
for the serious student, Acting-ln is an up-to-date and extensive
resource for references and background materials.
I wish the author every success in this undertaking.
- I. L. Moreno, M.D.,'1973
lx

Preface to the Third Edition
Since its first publication 23 years ago, Acting-In has now become
one of the maior introductory texts in the field of psychodrama
and a significant adiunctive resource for psychotherapists and oth-
ers who use role playing or action techniques in their work. So far,
it has been translated into Spanish, Dutch, Swedish, lapanese,
Chinese, and, I am told, Arabic, which speaks for how psychodra-
ma is now internationally recognized. There has been a tremen-
dous expansion of its use all over the world, and a corresponding
development of theory and integration of the method with analyt-
ic and other approaches.
I have significantly revised this edition, seeking to clarify vari-
ous processes. In 1988 t wrote Foundations of Psychodrann: History,
Theory 8 Practice as a complement to Acting-bt, designed to offer
more in the way of background material, not only regarding the
way psychodrama can be integrated with other therapies, but also
the philosophical and even spiritual basis of Moreno's work. And
although Actitrg-ln is designed for students, I've included recent
developments in theory and technique which can also be informa-
tive to experienced practitioners. One of the other functions of this
text is to provide a more scholarly basis to our work, and to this
end I've updated the references which reflect the varieties and
depth of applications of psychodrama in many fields of endeavor.
Psychodramatic methods have now become integrated into
drama therapy, drama in education, sociodramatic explorations of
community issues, personal growth programs, men's and
women's groups, organizational development, consulting to busi-
ness, various recovery and self-help groups, and many other con-
texts aside from psychotherapy. And within the fields of psy-
chotherapy, these approaches are further integrated with a wide
range of other methods-imagery, cognitive, behavioral, body-
XI

xll
Acting-In
work, family therapy, and programs of systematic eclecticism. This
not only reflects the potential of these methods to facilitate a wide
range of exploratory and therapeutic processes, but also to aid in
the development of more cost-effective treatments in a time of
increasing economic constraints.
Also, a number of procedures which had once been utilized pri-
marily in the clinical context are now being modified for applica-
tion in educational and spiritual dimensions of life, and not only
for young people, but throughout the life cycle. Psychodrama
should be viewed not as a separate school of thought, but as a
complement to the growing understanding of human nature and
the human potential. This was Moreno's vision, one that attempt-
ed to offer specific methods which could achieve the noble goals of
fostering creativity, spontaneity, self-expression, and community
spirit.
Finally, I want to acknowledge with the deepest appreciation
the inspiration and support of my muse and wife, Allee.
Adam Blatner, MD,TEP*
Austin, Texas
* A note about my name: In many citations regarding the first (1973) edi-
tion, I'm listed as H. Blatner, but in 1977 I changed my first name to
Adam. Incidentally, this shift in identity was stimulated by Zerka Moreno
who, in a workshop, had the group talk.about how we felt about our
names and whether we would choose a different one. At that time I had
remarried, so the idea of a new identity seemed right, and after a few
months of playing with the idea, we found a name more to my taste. To
my delight, the psychodrama community and others were very support-
ive of this change!

Introduction
Many of the most powerful active approaches in contemporary
psychotherapy and education are derived from the method of psy-
chodrama, in which a person is helped to imagine and enact a
problem instead of just talking about it. Psychodrama and its asso-
ciated methods of sociodrama, role playing, and sociometry were
invented around the 1930s by ]acob L. Moreno, M.D. (1889-1974).
The purpose of this book is to introduce some practical applica-
tions of the psychodramatic method to readers from a variety of
disciplines
The psychodramatic method integrates the modes of cognitive
analysis with the dimensions of experiential and participatory
involvement. Actually "doing" the interaction, engaging one's
own physical body and imagination as if the situation were
unfolding in the present moment brings into consciousness a host
of ideas and feelings not generally accessed through simply talk-
ing about that situation. The nonverbal elements of communica-
tions not only act interpersonally, but also as inner cues, so that, for
example, behaving in a more angry or frightened manner will
evoke an awareness of emotions which may have been otherwise
repressed.
Action approaches are especially useful in therapy not only with
patients who have little capacity for intellectual and verbal explo-
ration (e.g., children, psychotics, delinquents, etc.), but also for
those who tend to overintellectualize their experiences. One of
psychodrama's most significant advantages is that it converts the
participant's urge toward "acting-out" into the more constructive
channel of "acting-in."
xilt

xtv
Acting-In
ACTING-IN versus ACTING OUT
Expressing feelings and ideas in action is a natural tendency
because the physical experience of embodying a role lends a
greater degree of fullness, is a stronger expression of will, and
more completely affirms the sense of self. In other words, when an
idea is embodied in a form that can be both witnessed by others
and kinesthetically processed in one's own being, it becomes
"more real." This important theoretical concept has significant
implications for therapy and education (Schwartz & Schwartz,
1971). Moreno called this tendency act hunger, and noted that peo-
ple need to do more than simply talk about their reactions and
desires (Moreno, 1985).
If act hunger is frustrated, people will often impulsively "act
out," their activity expressing their needs outside of awareness
(Kellerman, '1,984; Ormont, 7969). This dynamic has been well
described by psychoanalysts, but what hasn't been appreciated is
that this same inclination can be harnessed in service of greater
self-awareness (Rubin, 1981). In psychodrama, the action is played
out and even exaggerated, linked to its original settings and to
other modes of expression. Because it operates in the interperson-
al field, witnessed by the director and audience, it also evokes the
protagonist's own "witnessing" function. Psychodrama converts
behavior intended to avoid awareness into behavior which pro-
motes insight and a greater capacity for self-reflectiveness
(Bromberg, 1958; Fingarette, 1969, Zeligs, 19SZ).
For this reason, I've given the name acting-in to the sublimation
9f acJ hunger as a vehicle for therapy or for personal or group
development. Acting-in (or what Davies in 1976 called ,,aating-
through") uses the dramatic context to generate "role distance,,
through which actors can figuratively step back and witness their
own performances. Role distance is the essential component of
imaginative play and the basis for the most natural way to learn.
simulation learning processes have applications not only in thera-
py, but in many types of training where a more complex under-
standing and skill development is needed, from the rehearsal of
dance to astronaut training.

Introduction
xv
In addition to the task of clarifying emotional conflicts, the psy-
chodramatic method can be applied to the challenge of developing
human potentialities. Through acting-in, the individual can be
reintroduced to many dimensions of personal experience that have
been neglected in our contemporary, overintellectualized society:
creativity, spontaneity, drama, humor, excitement, vitality, playful-
ness, ritual dance, body movement, physical contact, fantasy,
music, nonverbal communication, and a widened role repertoire.
Western civilization has relegated many of these pursuits to child-
hood, the theater, or mythology, and in so doing has drained our
souls of their richest treasures. It is essential that we learn to rec-
ognize the vitality that can only grow within the context of play,
and to cultivate and refine play so that we can preserve the spirit
of childhood in our adult lives (Blatner & Blatner, 1988). Such
activities also ground the individual in a truly wholesome and rel-
atively resilient sense of authentic self. Because of this, integrating
the experiential worlds of feelings, sensation, and imagination into
our existences may become a major goal of contemporary educa-
tion and psychotherapy.
PSYCHODRAMA IN CONTEXT: AN OVERVIEW
I do not view psychodrama as a separate school of thought, but
rather its methods and principles are complementary to a multi-
modal and integrative approach to psychotherapy or personal
development. Psychodrama may further be adapted to nonclinical
contexts, as role playing in education or business and industry, in
programs for spiritual development or community building, and
even as ways of problem solving and recreation in everyday life.
Although it is most powerful when used within a group context,
in modified form psychodramatic techniques can catalyze family
therapy processes, couple therapy, and even individual therapy
(Blatner, 1994; Stein & Callahan, 1982). And aside from the tech-
niques, the principles associated with psychodrama add a great
deal of richness to the general understanding of individual and
social psychology. Psychodramatic methods have been incorporat-
ed into many other approaches, including behavioral, cognitive,

xvr
Actittg-ln
"body therapies," family therapy, and Gestalt therapy. In Europe
and South America, psychodrama and psychoanalysis have been
integrated far more than in the United States, but the last decade
has seen increasing understanding of the way experiential and
analytical methods may operate synergistically.
I use a number of metaphors to illustrate my view of psy-
chodrama's place in treatment. Sometimes I suggest that the action
methods presented in this book are to therapy what the introduc-
tion of electric power tools were to carpentry: One has to have
reached a fair degree of competence in the craft to use them, but
the new tools add greatly to the ease and range of tasks. Or they
may be likened to the introduction of woodwind instruments to
the orchestra, which vastly extended and deepened the range of
effects that were possible. The mixture of two technologies is often
synergistic, that is, it leads to a new form that is more powerful
than simple addition can predict. So, too, does the addition of psy-
chodramatic methods to conventional verbal forms extend the
power of psychotherapy. Verbal and nonverbal forms need not be
at opposite poles, for it is quite possible to interweave the aspects
of cognitive and experiential, objective and subjective, and other
polarities of human experience (Blatner, 1968).
During the second half of the 20th century, the technological-
philosophical pendulum began to swing back again toward an
incorporation of the dimensions of emotion, sensation, and imagi-
nation into the world of personal experience. Psychotherapy is no
longer being restricted to the modes of dyadic or group verbal dis-
cussion. Eclecticism (which includes more active approaches to
psychotherapy) is being increasingly accepted (Arkowitz, 1993).
The importance of these phenomena was foretold in the first
quarter of the twentieth century by ]acob L. Moreno, a Viennese
psychiatrist who developed the methods of sociometry and psy-
chodrama, as well as being a major contributor to the evolution of
group psychotherapy. In an effort to reintroduce the spirit of
growth-through-play into our lives, he emphasized ideas about
spontaneity, creativity, action, self-disclosure, risk taking in
"encounter," importance of the present moment (he coined the

Introductiort
xvll
term here-and-now [Moreno, 19231), the significance of touch and
nonverbal communication, the cultivation of imagination and
intuition, the value of humor and the depth of drama- The psy-
chodramatic method and its derivatives are the primary vehicles
by which people can learn to develop these potentialities in them-
selves.
CAUTIONS
At this point, I wish to note some cautions for the reader.
Psychodiama is no Panacea: Any romanticizing of a single
approach is dangerous, as it blinds one to the limits of that
approach and the values of other methods. Psychodramatic tech-
.riqres can be very powerful, but mere technique is not enough. It
behooves the practitioner to develop skills with humility and com-
mitment. with creativity and sensitivity, the practitioner must
learn to know and work with the psychological dimensions of a
client's life.
I strongly encourage the reader to obtain some suPervised train-
ing in the use of psychodrama before attempting to apply any but
the most elementary methods. (How to get the training is dis-
cussed in Chapter 10.)The mastery of psychodrama itself requires
a significantly greater degree of training than can be provided in
any one book. One cannot learn these approaches through "cook-
book" reading, any more than one can learn art or music solely
from a text. Nevertheless, I hope that the reader may be stimulat-
ed to use some of the methods and to continue to explore the the-
ories and applications of an eclectic approach to psychotherapy
and education. I further emphasize the importance of supplemen-
tal readings from the bibliography at the end of this book.
In summary, therefore, I am presenting this book as an intro-
duction to the theory and practice of using the psychodramatic
method in a wide variety of psychotherapeutic and educational
settings. I believe that the applications of these methods can do
much to facilitate the reintroduction of the elements of spontane-
ity and creative empathy into human experience.

xYllt
REFERENCES
Actitrg-In
Arkowitz, H. (1993). Integrative theories of therapy. In D. K. Freedheim (Ed.),
History of psycholherapy: A century of change (pp. 261-303). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Blatnet H. A. (1968). Comments on some commonly held reservations about psy-
chod ra ma. G ro u p P s y c I to t hc r a py, 21 (l), ZO-25.
Blatne_r, A. (ry4). Psychodramatic methods in family therapy. In C. shaefer & L.
Carey (Eds.), Fanrily Ploy Therapy. (pp.23S-2A9. Northvale, NJ: Aronson.
Blatner, A., & Blatner, A. (1988). The ort of play: An adult's guide to recrainring imng-
inatittn and spontaneity. New York: Human Sciences.
Bromberg, W (1958). Acting and acting out. Anrcricotr lournal of psychothuapy, 12,
267-268.
Davies, M. H. (1975). The origins and practice of psychodrama. British lournal of
P sychio t ry, 1 29, 201-206.
Fingarette, H. (1959). self deception. In R. F. Holland (Ed.), sludrrc in phirosophical
psychology. New York: Humanities.
Kellerman, P. F. (1984). Acting out in psychodrama and in psychoanalytic group
therapy. Group Annlysis, 17 (3), t95-203.
Moreno,l. L. (1923). The philosophy of the here and now. (ln German). Berlin:
Gustav Kiepenheuer. (AIso noted on pp. xix-xx in Moreno,s 1953 2nd edi-
tion of Who Shall Surztioc?)
Moreno, J. L. (1985). Psyclrcdranm, Vol. 1 (p.55-6). Ambler, pA: Beacon House.
Ormont, L. R. (1969). Acting-in and the therapeutic contract in group psycho.
analysis. lnternational lournnl of Group Psychotherapy, lg,4ZHj2. 
-
Rubin, T. I. (1981). Foreword. In G. schattner & R. Courtney (Eds). Dronn thcrapy:
Vol. 2. Childrerr. New York: Drama Book Specialists.
schwartz, L., & schwartz, R. (1971). Therapeutic acting-out. psychothernpy: Thaory,
Research & P ract ice, 8(3), 205-207.
stein, M. 8., and Callahan, M. L. (1982). The use of psychodrama in individual
qlychotherapy. Iournul of Group Psychothernpy, Psychotlronn €r Soci.r,,,etry,
36(3),118_12e.
Zeligs, M. A. (1957). Acting-in. lournol of Anrcrican psychoanalytic Associatiotr, s,
685-706.

1
The Basic Elements of
Psychodrama
Psychodrama involves the staging of a problem in life as if it were
a play, and so certain terms are used which are derived from the-
atre: protagonist, director, stoge, audience, and the like (Moreno,
1946\. Moreno developed some terms specifically for psychodra-
ma, such as auxiliary cgo (nowadays more often called simply aux-
iliary.) And other terms have come into use as derivatives of psy-
chodrama or Moreno's role theory, such as role playing and soclo-
dranm.
Although psychodrama was first developed as a type of group
therapy, it quickly was applied in creative forms, as an integral
part of what is today called nilieu tlrcrapy in hospitals; with cou-
ples and families; and even with individuals, using only one or
two cotherapists. As sociodrarra it also addressed group issues that
dealt with the general roles in the group, beyond any focus on the
individual, and further was applied in community settings to
reevaluate not just the group, but the larger social network.
All these settings and situations have in common an apprecia-
tion that problems may be analyzed and worked with as if they
were a kind of play that could be creatively revised. We are encour-
aged to think of ourselves not, as Shakespeare said, "merely play-
ers," mindlessly playing out our life scripts, but rather also as the
playwrights and codirectors of our life's dramas. To meet this chal-
lenge, psychodrama makes available to us the rich methodology
that is used in the theatre. Thus, people can be helped to present,
for example, not only what actually happened in a given situation,
I

2
Actirtg-In
but more important, they can explore all the statements that were
never made, although they were thought, or feared, or remained at
the subconscious level.
Psychodrama thus opens the way to exploring possibilities
inherent in a situation, various aspects of the minds of each of the
players, and the richness of the interpersonal and cultural fierd.
And, as mentioned in the introduction, these explorations can
apply not only in psychotherapy, but also in many other settings
where one might want to encourage a greater understanding of the
complexities of life or to develop or practice strategies for being
more effective.
BASIC TERMINOLOGY
As mentioned earlier, Moreno named five basic elements of psy-
chodrama: the protagonist, director, auxiliaries, audience, and
stage.
The protagonist is the person who is the subject of the psy-
chodramatic enactment. Whether acting as a client, patient, stu-
dent, trainee, group membet or other form of participant, in the
act of portraying a personal life situation a person becomes the
protagonist. (ln this book, because complex situations are
described which demand pronouns that refer to a single person,
and in order to avoid the linguistic sexism yet prevalent in much
professional literature, I will generally refer to the protagonist as a
"he" and the director as a "she.")
The director is the person who orchestrates the psychodrama to
help the protagonist explore a problem. In therapy groups, the
director takes on the role components of both director and thera-
pist, although, for example, in hospital groups, a patient's individ-
ual therapist might also be present.
In personal development or other types of groups, the leader,s
role may be more flexible. In a training group, the director of an
enactment may be one of the group members. If the person who is
most frequently in the role of group leader needs to deal with her
own issues-either related to other aspects of her personal life or
regarding some interactions in the group itself-then another per-

The Basic Elentents of Psvchodrama
son serves as director and the Previous leader/director shifts into
the role of protagonist. These Psychodramatic roles-ProtaSonist,
director, audience, auxiliary- are not fixed assignments. They can
shift, and an individual might play each one of them in turn over
the span of several enactments. However, to accomplish more than
relatively simple forms of role playing, the director role does
require a complex of skills which go beyond the ordinary training
of most psychotherapists or SrouP leaders.
The arrxiliary (formerly also called the "auxiliary ego") is
Moreno's term for anyone besides the protagonist and the director
who takes part in a psychodrama. Usually the auxiliary Portrays
someone in the protagonist's life, such as a sPouse, employer, or
"another part" of the protagonist. More than a "supporting char-
acter," an auxiliary might play a bridge in a dream, a nameless
sense of pressure pushing on one's back, or even the protagonist's
unspoken feelings. This last mentioned role of the auxiliary is
given a specific term, the double. Use of the technique of doubling
is the subject of Chapter 3.
The term audiencc refers to the others present during the psy-
chodrama. The audience is the grouP in which the enactment
occurs and may be a psychotherapy group, a seminar or class in
school, or participants at a workshop in management training.
Being an audience implies more than simply being in the SrouP
because when the psychodrama is going on, the director uses the
audience as part of the process. For example, the audience may
give feedback, be a source of auxiliaries, or serve as a Greek cho-
rus. After the psychodrama is over, the SrouP ceases functioning as
an audience and becomes more like a conventional group with a
more interactive discussion dynamic.
THE STAGE
The sfngc is the area in which the enactment takes place' The stage
may be a formal platform for psychodrama; it may be the area off
to the side of a group or the actual locus of the conflict itt situ (e.g.,
the reenactment and exploration of a conflict between children on
the playground where it was occurring moments earlier)' There
3

4
Acting-In
are some props and structures, however, that can make the dra-
matic function even more effective.
In the original form of psychodrama, Moreno and his col-
leagues used a specially constructed stage, such as that shown in
Figure 1.1. The three levels, lighting arrangements, balcony, and
design were all empirically developed to facilitate the power of
the enactments. Any of these components can be useful if incrud-
ed (Enneis, 7952). Modifications of this design have also been
used, such as having part of the stage sunken, as was done at the
St. Louis State Hospital (Moren o,l97l, p. a9\.
Figure 1.1
The main stage should be at least 12-15 feet in diameter. A raised
platform that can easily be stepped onto is helpful in subriminally
establishing the "as-if" set in the participant. (The Greeks used thl
O
O
O
t-
{a

The Basic Elenrenls of Psychodrama
5
device of the proscenium arch to mark the border of the staSe-
when people cross the arch they enter or exit from the world of the
drama-.) Ai a protagonist and auxiliary ego move toward the stage,
their stepping upward indicates to all concerned that they are
entering the psychodramatic reality.
On the stage there may be a few props: Some lightweight chairs
and a simplJtable are most often used. Pillows, a mattress, and a
variety of other props can also be useful. The chair is not only for
sitting on, but, when empty, can "hold" any fantasied or proiected
figure. It can also become a barricade, a platform, or an- indicator
oiheight, authority, or status. The table can become a buildin8-toP,
a desk, a judge's seat, a breakfast-room table, or a cave in which to
cringe or.hide. Pillows and foam rubber bats can be used for fight-
ing,-pounding, beating, protection, or perhaps to be held as a baby'
-Mtre elaborate aids are hot essential but can provide remark-
able effects. Special lighting, for example, may be used to evoke
many moods: red to represent hell, a bistro, or an intense emotion-
al sclne; blue for death scenes, heaven, or the sea; total blackness
for isolation, loneliness, or a need to enact something privately;
and dim light for dream scenes. Music, either skilled accompani-
ment or emotionally meaningful recorded songs, can be a Power-
ful adjunct to psychodrama as well. Dance and movement activi-
ties can be intigrated into psychodramatic enactments, as well as
other creative arts therapy methods.
THE TECHNIQUES OF PSYCHODRAMA
In addition to the five basic elements, there are scores of psy-
chodramatic techniques and hundreds of variations (Blatner,
lggg). The maior techniques will be described in greater detail fur-
ther on, but to begin to orient you, here are some of their names
and the some of the purposes which they can serve.
. In order to clarify n protagonist's feelings, the techniques of fhe
double, soliloquy, nrultiple selaes, and nnnodrlnw are used.
o For heightening and facilitating the expression of entotion, the
directoi may use anrylification, asides, and the exoggerations of

6
Acting-In
nonverbal communications, along with exaggerations of the
dimensions of height, space, and position.
. The protagonist may be aided in becoming aware of person-
al behavior (self-confrontation) through the use of techniques
such as uideotnpe playback, role reuersal, behind-your back, audi-
ettce feedback, chorus, and nonuerhal internction exercises.
o Goals and values may be clarified through the use of the
nngic shop or the future-projection techniques.
o Support can be given with the techniques of ego building, shar-
ing, and the judicious use of physical contact, such as hug-
ging or holding.
o Issues of group process can be clarified through the tech-
niques of the spectrogranr and socioruetry.
. Finally, there are many special techniques that can be used
along with psychodrama, such as hypnosis and guided fantnsy.
Through the use of the above techniques, the director can help
the protagonist to enact a broad range of experiences: scenes from
everyday life, as well as dreams, memories, delusions, fears, and
fantasies.
AN OUTLINED DESCRIPTION OF A TYPICAL
PSYCHODRAMATIC ENACTMENT
I. The Warm-up (see Chapter 4)
A. The director warms herself up.
B. The group discusses goals, roles, fees, limits, time arrange-
ments, and so forth.
C. Getting acquainted; exercises are used that introduce
group members to each other.
D. The director leads the group in action exercises that
build group cohesion and spontaneity.
E. This often leads to a discussion of what the participant
experienced in the warm-up exercises, which in turn leads

The Basic Elentents of Psvchodrqtnct
to the emergence of a theme of common interest to the
group, or to an individual's problem.
F. One of the group members is selected to be the protagonist,
who will enact his own or the group's problem.
II. The Action (see Chapter 5)
A. The director brings the protagonist to the stage, where the
problem is briefly discussed (Schramski, 7979).
B. The conflict is redefined in terms of a concrete example-
one that could be enacted.
C. The director helps the protagonist to describe the physical
surroundings in which a specific action occurs, thus setting
the scene.
D. The protagonist is instructed to play the scene as if it were
occurring in the here-and-now
E. The director brings other members of the group forward to
take the parts of other significant figures in the protago-
nist's drama-these people then become the auxiliaries.
F. The opening scene is portrayed.
G. The director helps the auxiliaries to learn their roles by hav-
ing the protagonist change parts with them (reverse roles)
for a brief period during which the protagonist then por-
trays the behavior of the other figures in his drama. As the
auxiliaries learn their roles, the protagonist gives them
feedback until he feels that the scene is being enacted in an
essentially similar way to the way he pictures it in his
mind. This "molding" activity furthers the warm-up of the
auxiliary egos and the protagonist himself.
H. The scene continues with the director introducing other
psychodramatic techniques that function to elaborate on
the feelings being expressed (e.g., soliloquy, the double
technique, asides, etc.).
I. As the enactment unfolds, the director uses a variety of
other techniques in order to explore different facets of the
prota gonist's experience.
7

8
Acting-In
1. Ambivalence is explicitly demonstrated through the use
of several individuals (auxiliaries) on the stage, each
portraying a different part of the protagonist,s piyche.
2. Empathetic or proiected feelings of the protagonist can
be enacted through role reversal.
3. Self-confrontation for the protagonist may be utilized
through the mirror technique.
4. Significant past memories are reenacted.
5. Future plans, hopes, and fears can be symbolically real-
ized and explored.
6. The protagonist's suppressed emotions-guilts, resent-
ments, fears, yearning-can all be expressed using a
variety of facilitating techniques.
J. The action may be carried to a point where the protagonist
experiences a sense of having symbolically enacted those
behaviors that had been suppressed-fuifillment of act
hunger.
K. The protagonist is helped to develop other adaptive attitu-
dinal and behavioral responses to his situation-this is
called working through (see Chapter 6). (ln role playing
contexts, this process may become the predominani task oJ
the group.) Some specific techniquei used in working
through include:
1. Repeat role playing of the conflict, with the protagonist
trying a different approach with each attempt.
2. Modeling by other group members, who show how they
would deal with the problem.
3. Role reversal between the protagonist and his auxil-
iaries-the other figures in his enactment-so that the
protagonist can discover, through actually experiencing
the other person's situation, some clues ai to what
behaviors might achieve the desired effect.

The Basic Elements of Psychodruma
lII. Closure (see Chapter 6)
A. Following the main action, the director helps the protagonist
to receive some supportive feedback from the other group
members. Rather than encouraging an intellectualized
analysis of the protagonist's problem, the director encour-
ages the group members to share with the protagonist the
feelings they had related to the enactment.
B. The director may proceed to use a variety of supportive Psy-
chodramatic techniques.
C. Further discussion by the group ensues.
D. Finally, the director either goes on to the Process of warm-
ing-up to another psychodramatic enactment with a differ-
ent protagonist, or moves toward terminating the grouP,
possibly using a variety of closing techniques.
MAIOR FORMS OF PSYCHODRAMATIC ENACTMENT
Finally, there is the terminology regarding the meaning of psy-
chodrama itself. In fact, there is a fair amount of crossover in how
the terms are used, and some degree of cultural politics and
semantics associated with the various words. In some locales, role
playing is much preferred, as the prefix psycho- seems to suggest
something that's either too psychoanalytic or too criminally
insane, while the suffix -drama for many people still carries an aura
of phony theatrics, hystrionic emotionality, and manipulativeness,
as if a background voice could caution, "Now don't get dramatic!"
So some directors are using different words to communicate the
essence of this most valuable group of methods, such asaction tech-
niques or clinical role playing.
One thing that psychodrama is not, however, is merely a Psy-
chologically infused dramatic novel or theatrical piece. Nor is it a
similarly psychologically loaded and rather dramatic event in the
news, although such phenomena have been termed "psychodra-
mas" in magazines, newspapers, and other media. This point must
be emphasized, because what are generally and erroneously so
described always lack the essential element of the psychodramatic
method: This approach is a context in which the participants are
9

l0
Acting-In
enabled to suspend their habitual reactive patterns and reconsider
how else they might choose to respond. Psychodrama is a method
aimed at creativity, healing, and wisdom, not a blind playing out
of some tragic pattern of self-deception. I hope the readers of this
book will help to correct the misuse of the term by enlightening
journalists who may not know of the constructive power or even
the existence of psychodrama as a methodolgy.
Role plnying has been a term used as an equivalent to psy-
chodrama by some leaders in the field, such as Kipper (1986) or
Corsini (1966). In other settings, this term is used a little more
specifically to refer to enactments in which the goals are more lim-
ited. For some, role playing avoids any exploration of the person-
alities of the players and focuses only on a deeper understanding
of the role-and this meaning is closer to the idea of "sociodrama,"
to be discussed in a moment. For others, role playing refers to an
even more superficial or behavioristic approach, focusing on the
task of rehearsing a behavior, or finding the best specific response
strategy. Originally, Moreno used the term, role training for this lat-
ter purpose. In these more task-oriented senses, the term role play-
ing blends into other simulation forms of learning or exploring,
astronaut or flight training, military exercises, situation tests, and
other approaches which have become widespread in our culture.
SOCIODRAMA versus PSYCHODRAMA
Sociodrama refers to an exploration of a problem that involves a
role or a role relationship, a theme which might be relevant to a
group of people. Moreno wrote about people of different racial or
ethnic backgrounds meeting to attempt to resolve their differences.
Some other examples are:
o Nurses attempting to understand more about their feelings
about patients with AIDS
o Teenage boys and girls meeting to explore expectations in
dating and attitudes about sexuality
r Seminary students exploring common religious issues

The Basic Elements of Psyghsclran ,
ll
. Physicians, nurses, administrators, lawyers, and others in
the community exploring problems of medical ethics
o New parents sharing feelings about the stresses and strate-
gies of dealing with the first year of the baby's life
Although a person may participate as a protagonist in a socio-
drama, the enactment would relate to iust one of the protagonist's
roles, one which represents a role shared with others in the SrouP
and/or of concern to all the grouP. Other particularities of the
individual are not to be considered. Thus, sociodrama could be
described as group-centered.
One of the principles of directing sociodramas is that in general
they should not be allowed to turn into psychodramas. A great
deal of learning and benefit can emerge iust by sticking to the topic
and exploring the full depth of experiences inherent in the role sit-
uation itself. The numbers of issues, the many levels of awareness,
the different types of often conflicting sub-roles, all need to be
brought into consciousness. For example, a group of nurses in
training might use sociodrama to exPlore the challenge of dealing
with certain kinds of patients. When one of the nurses (as the pro-
tagonist) becomes involved in a scene, the emotional issues of the
problem will be expressed. However, the director should bring out
those facets of the relationship that would likely be present in
many or most nurse-patient interactions; those feelings unique to
the protagonist would not be emphasized. In other words, it
would be inappropriate in a sociodrama for a director to deal with
the personal aspects of the nurse who is the protagonist, for this
might imply to the others in the grouP that the difficulties in the
interaction were due to deficiencies unique to that nurse
(Sternberg & Garcia, 1989.)
Psyclrcdranra, in contrast, addresses the particularities of a single
person who is at the nexus of many roles, and more, specific role
relationships-not only with a sPouse and child, for example, but
with this specific sPouse with unique qualities, and a Particular
child with certain abilities and problems. So psychodrama, in this
case, has a very indiaidualized focus; it is protagonist-centered. The
drama may shift among the many facets of the protagonist's life-

t2
Acting-ln
his past, present, and future. Usually psychodrama moves toward
relatively deep emotional issues (Kellerma n, l9B7 ; Kippec 1988).
It is possible to use sociodrama as a warm-up for a psychodra-
ma, but it is unethical to do so without the clear consent of the
group and the people involved to such a personal exploration. In
most situations, therefore, where sociodrama is the expected
process, one should not intrude on people's privacy by subtly
manipulating group members to disclose elements of their private
lives.
However, depending on the composition of the group and its
goals, and with the cautions mentioned above, it is possible to
interweave several modalities. A psychodrama may arise out of or
lead into a sociodrama; a role training exercise might be used as a
warming-up or integrating process, complementing psycho- or
sociodrama.
PSYCHODRAMA AND DRAMA THERAPY
In the last two decades the field of drama therapy has emerged
as one of the recognized creative arts therapies, and there has been
a gradual process of cross-fertilization between it and psychodra-
ma. The two fields differ in the following ways: psychodramatists
generally begin as psychotherapists and then take specialized
training in the use of Moreno's contributions. Many use psy-
chodramatic methods in coniunction with other approaches, and
some apply psychodrama also in nontherapeutic contexts, such as
education and consulting to businesses. Drama therapists general-
ly are trained first in the theater and then receive speiialized train-
ing in drama therapy and psychotherapy. psychodramatists
emphasize protagonists playing scenes involving their own lives,
while drama therapists give more emphasis to the taking of roles
other than their own (Jennings & Minde, 1993). For ixample,
drama therapists might have group members create improvisa-
tions (usually purely imaginary, but sometimes based on charac-
ters and/or plot themes in myths or recognized plays), and their
spontaneity exercises are often adapted theatre games, because
there is healing in the act of self-expression itself. Also, the act of

The Basic Elentents o.f Psvc'hodruma
playing and pretending often leads, albeit obliquely, to self-revela-
tion. Drama therapists are also somewhat more grouP centered
and work towards the general cultivation of spontaneity and
group interaction rather than the focusing of one of the SrouP
members' problems. Finally, while psychodramatists avoid any
rehearsal, some drama therapists recognize the value of having
clients prepare for a performance which expresses asPects of their
own personal experience.
I see value in both approaches. Some patients in fact need "role
distance," the protection provided by not playing their real selves,
but rather some other character. Then they can reflect on how they
engaged in that presentation. Some psychodramatists, therefore,
use these more skit-like drama therapy approaches for certain
groups. Also, while earlier drama therapists used more scripts,
psychodrama relied on improvisation; howevet drama therapy in
the last few decades has also moved far more toward almost com-
pletely unscripted work. (Interestingly, Moreno, in the early years
of his New York City open session, sometimes had protagonists go
offstage and plan with an auxiliary a small skit to express their sit-
uations; soon, however, the process evolved into entirely sPonta-
neous productions.)
More recently, drama therapy has integrated actual psychodra-
ma as part of its own general range of methods (Emunah, 1994),
while psychodrama in turn has been integrating more drama ther-
apy exercises as warm-ups and is recognizing the value of some-
times using ritual to close or intensify aspects of a more classically
Morenian enactment (Blatner, 1994). Furthermore, the theoretical
foundations of drama therapy as developed by a number of
authors (many of whom are noted in the Bibliography) also are rel-
evant to the understanding of the psychological, historical, and
sociocultural basis for psychodrama.
ACTION TECHNIQUES
In addition to its classical rendering, psychodrama's major contri-
bution has been (and may yet be) its component methods. Their
importance, in fact, is emphasizedby the title of this book. Role
r3

l4
Acting-In
reversal, doubling, multiple parts of self, and many other tech-
niques may be modified and applied in individual, couples, con-
joint family, and group therapies, and integrated with other
schools of thought.
A number of psychodramatic methods have become so incorpo-
rated into other approaches to therapy that many professionals
aren't aware of their origins. striking examples include the use of
"sculpture" in family therapy, and Fritz Perls'employment of the
"auxiliary chair" technique into his method of Gestalt therapy. The
value of knowing the origins is not merely a matter of giving
Moreno credit, but rather of leading practitioners to the conciusion
that there is value in learning all the associated techniques and
principles in this rich complex of innovations.
Equally important, while classical psychodrama requires both
more training and a number of associated conditions and cautions,
counselors and therapists working with individuals and families
can readily apply its component methods. And because these tech-
niques can powerfully catalyze the process of psychotherapy, mak-
ing it more efficient, it becomes an even more valuable tooi in light
of the present reality of cost restraints.
The idea of using specific action techniques-sometimes called
experiential techniques or structured experiences-has also become
incorporated into a variety of other fields, as discussed in the chap-
ter on applications. In the encounter groups and the ,,human poten-
tial movement" of the late 1960s through the mid-1970s, psy-
chodramatic methods were integrated with imagery techniques,
bodywork techniques derived from Alexandei Lowen,s post-
Reichian method of bioenergetic analysis, and ,,sensory awiken-
ing" methods developed by Charlotte selver and Charies Brooks.
Other expressions associated with these methods included ,,growth
games," and "nonverbal exercises." The human potential move-
ment evolved into a wide range of more focused programs for per-
sonal growth, but the use of structured experiences continues.
- Moreno's early work with improvisational theatre was largely
forgotten, but "improv" began again in the United States in thelatl
1950s and what Fox (1994) called the tradition of the "nonscripted
theatre" drew from many sources to become the kind of culiurar
force that Moreno would have enjoyed.

The Betsic' Elenrcnls o.f Psvchodrumu
l5
SUMMARY
This chapter introduced some of the basic elements and features of
psychodrama, its terminology and relations to other fields of
endeavor. While classical psychodrama is a complex approach,
many of its methods can be integrated with other types of psy-
chotherapy and thereby add to the efficacy of treatment.
REFERENCES / RECOMMENDED READINGS
Blatnet A. (1988). Principles of psychodramatic techniques. In Foundotions of psrl'
clttdrnnm (pp. 151-157). New Vrrk: Springer.
Blatner, A. (1994). Foreward. In R. Emunah , Acting for reol: Draun thcropq l'roc'('ss,
! ach n i rT u t' o n tl pa rfii r n m n c r:. New York: Brunner/ Mazel.
Corsini, R. J. (1966). Rolt'1/m7irrg in psvclnthL'rt1;17' Chicago: Aldine. Has annotated
bibliography.
Emrrnah, R. (1994). Aclingfttr rcol. Drnun tlrcrnyv l,ft)c'('ss trnd trclnriquc' New Ytrrk:
Brunrrer/Mazel.
Enneis,,. M. (1952). Establishing a psychodrama ProBram. Crorrp Psr/c/rothfinlty,
s(3),111-11e.
Fpx, Jonathan. (1994) Acls ry'.scn,icr': Sptutnncity, cturnitnwrl, traditiott in tln'ntw-
scriyttl tlnntrc. New Paltz, NY Ttrsitala.
Jr.nnings, S. & Minde, A. (1993). At'l llu:royv trtrd drnnmtlu'rnpv: Mnsks o.f tltc soul.
Lorrdon: Jessica Kirrgsley.
Kellerman, P. F. (1987). A proposed defirritiorr of psy66,r6.nma. lournal of Croup
P sy ch o t I u' r n p y, P sy c h od r n n m & S oc i tn n c t r y, 4 0(2), 7 6-80.
Kipper, D. A. (1986). PsrTclrol/rcrrryv tlrtwglt clinicnl rrrlc plnyirr.g. New Ytrrk:
Brunner/Mazel.
Kippe'r, D. A. (1988). Orr the definition of psychodrama: Atrother view- lourrurl of
G ro u lr Psrl cl rttl I rc rn pr1, Psrlc hod ra n ur €t Soc i o n n' I r y, 40(4), I 64-1 68.
Morentr, ,. L. (1946). ['sychodrama ancl group psychotherapy. Socionu'lrr1,9(2-3),
249-253.
Moreno, J. L. (1971). Psychodrama. lrr I-{. l. Kaplarr & B.r.Sadtrck (Eds.),
Cotttprclrt'ttsitc .rin)lp psyclwtltcrayy (pp. a60-500). Baltimore: Williams &
Wilkins.
Sclrramski, T. G. (1979). A systematic model of psychodrama . Grou1t Psrlcltollu'rapy,
Psyclnttlrnnn & Socirtnrctry, 32, 20-30.
Sternberg, P., & Garcia, A. (1989). Sttciotlrunm: W/ro'.s irl tTotrr slocs? Westport, CT:
Praeger.

2
The Auxiliary
Moreno used the term auxiliary ego, to refer to any person other
than the director who participates in a psychodramatic enactment
in order to help the protagonist explore his problem. More fre-
quently in the last 20 years, this term has been shortened to auxil-
rary. Some practitioners have avoided Moreno's terminology,
using "assistants" or "helpers." Auxiliaries not only play a variety
of roles in psychodramatic, sociodramatic, and role-playing situa-
tions, but they also can take part in an action technique in ongoing
psychotherapy groups (Zinger, 1975).
TYPES OF AUXILIARY ROLES
There are six types of roles that may be performed by an auxiliary:
1. The role of a significant other perso,t. The auxiliary becomes
someone in one of the protagonist's social networks, for
example, a wife, son, employer, friend, or therapist. When
this person is the main character in the enactment playing
opposite the protagonist, he or she is occasionally called fke
antagonist.
2. The double. As the double, the auxiliary takes the role of the
protagonist's alter ego. In this role, the auxiliary helps the
protagonist to express inner feelings more clearly. The tech-
nique of using an auxiliary in the role of double is extreme-
ly important in psychodrama and will be discussed more
fully in the next chapter.
l6

The Auxiliary
t7
3. Generalized supporting character. The dramatic situation may
call for a police officer, teacher, client-but not a specific
person known to the protagonist. These supporting charac-
ter roles may seem to be somewhat clichdd, but they serve
to support the protagonist's experience.
4. A fantasied figure. Examples of fantasied roles include God,
a judge, a tempter, an idealized parent the protagonist
never knew or the "Prince Charming" who will rescue the
protagonist.
5. An inanimate object to which the protagonist relates. The object
could be his bed, doorway, house, the desk that mocks its
owner (the protagonist) for his lack of self-discipline: "Hey!
What about all this work you've piled on me? You're
always saying you'll get to me, but you never do!" The psy-
che has an innate tendency to personify, attribute feelings
and intentions to things, animals, natural phenomena, and
spirits. For example, a woman exploring her relationship
with her daughter-in-law might interact with an auxiliary
playing the part of her daughters-in-law's living room. "It"
becomes embarrassed when the mother-in-law pays a visit,
and says in an aside to the audience: "Oh-oh, here she
comes . . . she's going to want to change everything!" Then,
to the mother-in-law: "You think I can't possibly look good
unless you have a hand in fixing me up?"
6. The role of an abstract concept or a collcctiae stereotype.
Auxiliaries may play, for example, "society," "contempo-
rary youth," "they," "the church i' "iustice," and so forth.
FUNCTIONS OF THE AUXILIARY
The basic idea of the auxiliary role is that it challenges the protag-
onist with something responsive and alive, which brings a kind of
immediate role demand to the process. Role demand is a term that

l8
Acting-ln
describes the way certain behaviors, such as a baby's crying, a sib-
ling's grabbing one's toy, or a mother's worried criticism, tend to
generate complementary roles, such as a comforting parent, a com-
petitive child, or a submissive or rebellious adolescent.
As a related principle, the auxiliary's speaking in the here-and-
now and her manner of encountering "in role" tends to pull the
protagonist into the interaction as if it were actually happening
there for the first time. Thus the auxiliary functions to involve the
protagonist more deeply in the psychodramatic enactment, which
in turn tends to bring out his basic conflicts and suppressed feel-
ings more rapidly and completely.
Zerka Moreno (7978) notes five functions of the auxiliary, each
one taking the protagonist to a deeper level of insight:
1. Representation. The first is as a concrete representation of
some other-perhaps a person, figure in a dream, or part of
the body. The auxiliary must warm up to the role assigned.
The art lies in picking up the hints and statements from the
protagonist's responses in the ongoing interview between
the director and protagonist as well as from cues which
occur as the scene unfolds. For example, an auxiliary char-
acterized as critical must be able to behave in a "calling-on-
the-carpet" manner; a mother who is said to be infantilizing
should be able to mix worry and control. The performance
of this role must be similar in essence to the behavior of the
person being represented, but need not be exact. Indeed, a
small amount of unexpected behavior on the part of the
auxiliary often increases the protagonist's spontaneous
involvement in coping with that challenge.
2. Co-inaestigafion. Auxiliaries also participate in their second
function as co-investigators, so their behavior serves to
evoke spontaneous reactions from the protagonist. They
must probe to find out if the scene is reasonably true to the
protagonist's experience. If not, the director can help warm
the auxiliary up a little more, the way a director coaches an
actor. It's important that the auxiliary approximates the
protagonist's perception of the way the role needs to be

The Auxiliar"-
l9
played, expressinB the essential qualities in the problemat-
ic interaction. If the auxiliary doesn't Senerate a sufficient
match, the protagonist is liable to fall out of role. (If that
happens, the director has the protagonist reverse roles with
the auxiliary and show how the other role should be
played.) If the role behavior continues to be incongruent
with the protagonist's sense of the appropriate behavior, it
interferes with the flow of spontaneity.
As part of the co-investigation, the auxiliary may try some
unexpected behaviors, either spontaneously, based on intu-
ition, or in response to a director's suggestion. The protag-
onist's spontaneous reaction may in turn lead to an "action
insight."
3. Depth. The third function is that of presenting the other in
some greater depth so that the protagonist must become
aware of the fullness of feeling, the mixture of motives, or
other new dimensions which might not have been previ-
ously considered. For example, if the director senses the
secrecy of a theme, the auxiliary may be coached to whis-
per, which draws the protagonist into a greater degree of
speaking confidentially. On the other hand, if the auxiliary
escalates into screaming and cursing, this may bring out a
symmetric response, a similar expressiveness on the pro-
tagonist's part. On the other hand, the auxiliary's role
behavior might stimulate the protagonist to take a "com-
plementary" role: if the auxiliary acts iudgmental, the pro-
tagonist responds with defensiveness, rebelliousness, or
gives an explanation; if the auxiliary acts helpless, the pro-
tagonist becomes protective; or dominant behavior might
evoke a complementary submissive reaction'
4. Therapeutic. When it is appropriate and with the guidance
of the director, the auxiliary can implement a fourth func-
tion, which is to behave in a reparative or otherwise thera-
peutic fashion. Admittedly, there's an interpretative com-
ponent implicit in this, and its application is an intrinsic
part of the art and teamwork of psychodrama.

20
Acting-In
5. Bridge to reality. Finally, a fifth function is that of serving as
a bridge for a protagonist who is out of touch with reality
by creating a role that partakes of the protagonist's world-
view and yet also introducing graded degrees of consensu-
al reality. In the appendix to my Foundations of Psychodrama
I include an old story about the way a sage, acting in this
fifth function, helps cure a delusional prince, exercising a
kind of mental aikido.
There are occasions when it's probably best that the protagonist
plays all the parts in the enactment. The drama with no auxiliaries
is called autodrama or monodrama.The protagonist may shift places
using one or two empty chairs, and have an encounter between
different parts of himself, or with his projection of someone with
whom he has a conflict. Fritz Perls used monodrama as a core tech-
nique in Gestalt therapy.
Some of the indications for the directors choosing to use mon-
odrama instead of using auxiliaries include: (a) when the protago-
nist is in individual therapy, (b) when the director wants the pro-
tagonist to find out that the "answers" to his questions are to be
found within himself, or (c) when the protagonist could play both
roles in an encounter much more easily than could any auxiliary.
THE SELECTION OF THE AUXILIARY
The role of the auxiliary is usually played either by one of the
group members or by a trained staff member or cotherapist. Such
a trained auxiliary is most often found in situations where there is
an ongoing program of psychodrama. The person may be a psy-
chodrama director-in-training, a nurse on an inpatient ward, a
cotherapist, or simply another staff member who is experienced in
the use of psychodramatic methods.
The main advantage of using a professional auxiliary to play
key roles is that she is experienced in warming herself up to the
roles involved. An auxiliary who can play a variety of roles and
easily express feelings (i.e., one who has a high degree of spon-
taneity) can galvanize a psychodramatic enactment. Furthermore,

The Auxiliarv
2t
a great deal of spontaneity is especially necessary in roles that
involve the exhibition of grossly crude, childish, cruel, arrogant,
spiteful, seductive, or humiliating behavior.
On the other hand, even when there are trained auxiliaries pre-
sent, there are times when it is best to allow different SrouP mem-
bers to be auxiliaries and play the various parts. For example, in a
psychodrama in which a girl is exploring her competitive feelings
toward other women, the auxiliary who is to be the man over
whom the girls fight may be played by one of the shy men in the
group. While his role as auxiliary serves a function in the girl's
exploration of her problem, it may also benefit him. Even in wann-
up techniques, Broup members may be picked to play parts that
would normally oppose their habitual style: The constricted, nice-
guy type might benefit by acting in the role of a villain; the shy,
plain girl may discover some sexy aspects of herself by playing a
seductress; a "stuffed shirt" may loosen up by playing a role which
gives him permission to be silly, that is, a child, a monster, or an
animal.
Another factor to be considered in the selection of auxiliaries is
the degree to which a group member identifies with the protago-
nist's situation, or with the position of one of the other parts in the
enactment. If an auxiliary has a conflict in her own life that is sim-
ilar to that of the protagonist, the value the psychodrama has for
the protagonist can either be increased or decreased. To some
extent, the "carry-over" from the auxiliary's own situation can
validly be applied to the protagonist's life, but beyond a certain
point it can become a disconcerting pressure that only confuses the
protagonist. Unless the director is alert to the auxiliary's behavior
and applies firm control, the auxiliary can impose artificial issues
upon the protagonist's drama. The director may occasionally
check with the protagonist by asking: "Is this the way your [wife,
mother, etc.]acts?"
TECHNIQUES IN THE SELECTION OF THE AUXITIARY
Most often the director asks the protagonist to choose the auxil-
iaries for specific roles. (Later the protagonist can be asked the

22
Acting-In
basis for those "intuitive" choices.) In the next most common
option the director asks the group for volunteers to play the desig-
nated roles. If the auxiliary is to play a supportive, "doubling"
role, as will be discussed in the next chapter, the director might
inquire, "Has anyone here been in Joe's situation and able to dou-
ble for him?"
The role of trained auxiliary is another kind of technique. Some
roles are best played by another person who is experienced in role
taking. This might be someone who assists as a cotherapist, a staff
member in a psychotherapy program, or an advanced student
"apprentice." Trained auxiliaries can be especially helpful for por-
traying the more difficult, angrier, aggressive, or otherwise nega-
tive roles that might make most group members feel too vulnera-
ble or stigmatized. Roles that require a great deal of flexibility and
ingenuity are often filled best by a trained auxiliary.
The director may suggest certain group members for specific
auxiliary roles, either because she thinks that person (a) might be
especially effective in that role; (b) might benefit from playing the
role; (c) is familiar with some aspect of the role; or (d) is the only
person in the group who could either play or identify with a very
narrowly defined role.
Sometimes the group process is such that the allocation of roles
in an enactment may best be the decision of the group, or at least
the group members may be queried as to which of their number
should take which role. This is particularly effective in sociodra-
mas or when working with sociometry and transferences in order
to assess subtle projection patterns and bring out tendencies to
assume roles within the group.
SHARING "IN ROLE"
After an enactment the auxiliary is often asked not only to "share"
her own feelings regarding the protagonist's situation, but is also
invited to comment on her own experiences in-role as an auxiliary.
As an example, in an enactment a woman was playing a scene
between her perfectionistic father and herself (as an eight-year-old
child). The man chosen to be the auxiliary had to yell at the pro-

The Auxilian,
23
tagonist-as-child. Afterwards, during the sharing, this man, then in
his forties and a rather mild-mannered person, said he was also
raised by a harsh, judgmental father. On being asked how he felt
playing the role, he replied that he found it difficult. It brought
back many memories, but he wished he could feel more often the
power associated with giving himself permission to express
aggression openly.
Another technique is for the director to ask the group members
after an enactment to discuss roles in which they would be most or
least comfortable. The group could also discuss which roles would
be most helpful for each to play in the future. These discussions
further help the group members to develop receptivity toward
playing the auxiliary role in later enactments.
OTHER AUXILIARY ROLES
The auxiliary chair. An empty chair can be used in a warm-up (see
Chapter 4, p. 53) and can also represent the significant other in an
enactment. If the protagonist feels angry, he may beat the chair
with cushions or kick the chair-actions he would not be permit-
ted to perform with a live auxiliary. The chair can also be a barrier
to get around, representing either an emotional or physical block.
Lastly, two empty chairs are often used as props for the protago-
nist to move to and from. For example, the director says: "Joe, in
this chair, the nice, obedient part of you speaks to your mother
(played by an auxiliary); in that chair, the rebellious, sullen part of
you can also talk to your mother in a way you have never
expressed yourself" (see Figure 2.1).
Tlrc silent auxiliary. There are times when it is sufficient to keep
an auxiliary on stage even if she is to be silent, for she can provide
support simply by being present. ln general, though, an auxiliary
who is not being utilized should be released from the role. It is
unfair to expect the person to stand around, sometimes in an
uncomfortable position, while a more focused sub-scene is
explored.

24
Acting-In
Figure 2.1
THE AUDIENCE AS AUXILIARY
Members of the audience can be asked to give comments, either in
the discussion period or during a break in the enactment. sometimes
specific roles will be assigned: someone to observe the process;
someone to identify with the protagonist and/or one of the auxil-
iary's roles; someone to try to think of altemate solutions. several
group members may chant or repeat some fixed statement in the
background as a chorus,such as the contents of a hallucination, obses-
sion, delusion, judgmental attitude, secret wish, and so on.
The audience may be used as objects of the protagonist's state-
ments: The protagonist makes a statement reflecting an intemal-
ized attitude, the director may have that attitude ;,played out,,
until it becomes hollow. For example, the protagonist says, ,,I am
an adult," but continues to act childishly. Using a technique from
Gestalt therapy, the director says, "Go around to each p".ror., in the
group and tell him or her that."
Thebehind-the-back technique is indicated if the director and pro-
tagonist agree to get some feedback while not yet being directly
confronted. The audience is instructed to imagine that the protag-
onist is not present, symbolized by his turning his back. wittr ttris
dramatic device, he nevertheless gets to overhear what others say
about him. This may be part of a family enactment or as a tech-

The Auxiliarlt
,<
nique to foster disclosure within an interactive group Process. It
must be managed with tact and discretion, though (Corsini, 1973).
Audience members can double for each other and speak out on
issues where they might otherwise be silent. A trained auxiliary
might start this, and the others follow. For example, the audience
is getting bored, but says nothing. An audience double exaggerates
the group's slouching, nonverbal behavior and shouts,"Boy, is this
boring!" or "He's manipulating the heck out of us!"
GUIDELINES FOR THE AUXILIARY
The many techniques whereby the director can involve auxiliaries
are known as warming-up the auxiliary. Much of what is said
about warming-up in Chapter 4 applies here. These techniques
also apply to the warming-up of the double (see Chapter 3).
At the outset of the enactment, the protagonist can role reaerse
(i.e., change parts) and demonstrate the behavior that the auxiliary
is to portray.The protagonist may state the opening lines spoken
by both parties. The director can then ask the protagonist in the
role of the other person to show not only the other's words, but
also the other person's mood, posture, tone of voice, and nonver-
bal behavior.
From the moment the auxiliary is selected, he or she should be
encouraged to move right into the role, acting in the here-and-now
For example, if a group member is picked to be the protagonist's
mother, she may begin talking even as she moves onto the stage:
"Look at you!You're so thin! Doesn't your wife feed you?"
The auxiliary should play her hunches, take risks, and follow
the cues of the director and the protagonist. If the protagonist cor-
rects her, the auxiliary should change set quickly, for example:
PRorac;oltst: No, my mother is different, she only talks about herself.
AuxtLtnnv: (changing set) Oh, Bill, why haven't you written me?! You
know how lonely I am....
Pnotacotttst (nods his head, and answers) But Mom...
As the scene changes or parts are reversed, the auxiliary is
instructed to repeat the last spoken line in her role, for example:

26
are:
Pnoracorutsr:
Auxrrrnnv:
Director:
Acting-In
(as mother) Why haven't you written?
(as protagonist) Well . . .
(interrupting, to let protagonist answer for himself)
Change parts. (They change places on the stage.)
(as mother, repeats last line) Why haven't you written?
Mom, I wrote you last month!
(Carrying on) Last month is too long, [and so forthl
Other guidelines for directing and performing the auxiliary role
Auxiliary:
Pnorecorvtsr:
AuxrLreny:
. The director should consider briefing the auxiliary as to her
role, or have the protagonist brief the auxiliary to the side
while the director keeps the attention of the group.
r Even if one of the people in the protagonist's situation
smokes a good deal, and in spite of smoking being a popu-
lar (but declining) theatrical "piece of business," smoking
should be prohibited on stage in order to free the partici-
pants' hands for dramatic gesture or action, as well as in con-
sideration of the sensitivities of the group members. (Most
psychodrama groups nowadays are nonsmoking, and if they
involve extended sessions, breaks are arranged for those
who smoke to step outside.)
o The auxiliary can be asked to bring up her own chair or
prop, thus mobilizing her activity.
. The auxiliary can be helped by yet another auxiliary who
doubles for her; this technique thus warms up the auxiliary.
(This works best when the situation is sociodramatic. In
more protagonist-centered enactments the auxiliary's dou-
ble is really a projection of a projection and may distract the
protagonist; it's better simply to reassign the auxiliary.)
o The auxiliary should be instructed to follow the director's
directions, which may be spoken out loud-not whis-
pered-to her.

The Auxiliarv
27
r If the protagonist tends to drop out of role, the auxiliary
shouldaddress him as if he were still in role: "How dare you
turn your back on your mother!" The auxiliary may even
grab the protagonist's arm.
. The protagonist should be consulted occasionally to see if
the auxiliary is playing the scene with reasonable accuracy.
If the auxiliary cannot satisfy the protagonist's sense of how
the role is to be played, the director should feel free to dis-
miss the auxiliary and ask someone else to assume the role.
. A scene can be staged that precedes the main scene in time or
logical sequence. For example, the "employer" plays a brief
scene in which he receives information from another auxil-
iary, the "foreman," about the protagonist "employee's" dif-
ficulties in work; following this, the confrontation between
protagonist and employer can be staged.
In summary, the auxiliary's function is to play a variety of roles
in the protagonist's enactment' The auxiliary's behavior and con-
frontation provoke the protagonist into a deeper involvement in
the here-and-now of the drama. The effective use of the auxiliary
can heighten the power of any action approach.
REFERENCES / RECOMMENDED READINGS
Broclie, R. (1992). Trairring the auxiliary ego. Arrslrn/iorr & Ncur zt'nlnnd
P sy c l nd ro n n Asso('l,lli(), r l o t t r n n l, 1, 37 49
Corsini, R. J. (1973). The' behind-the-back encotrnter. In L.R. Wolberl; & E'K'
Schwaitz, Group llrcrnpv, 1973: /11 1y7t1,77ti1,71t. New York: Intercontinental
Medical Book Co. (PP 55-70).
More,nrr, Z. T. (1958). Reluctant audierrce technique. Croup Psychtttlu'rnpy, 11(1),
278-282.
Mrrrentr, Z. T. (19781. The function of the auxiliary ego in psychodrama with spe-
cial reference to psychotic patients. croult Psyclttttlu'ro1tr1, Psyclndronn [t
Sttc ittt n c t n1, 31, 163-166.
Seabtrurne, B. (1985). The role, of the auxiliary. In Pmclicrll ospccls of ltsychodronn.
St. Louis, MO: Atrthor. (first written as training paPers around 1961).
Toeman, Z. (1946). The auxiliary ego, double, and mirror techniques. Socittnrctry,
9,178-183.
Zinger, N. (1975). A workirrg paper ft-rr group atrxiliary e8()s. Cnrrrp PsrTc[othcrnlty
& Psut'lndrnntn, 28, 152-156.

3
The Double
The double technique consists of the use of an auxiliary in the spe-
cialized role of playing the part of the inner self of the protagonist.
The double-also occasionally called the alter ego- is perhaps the
most important technique in psychodrama because it helps pro-
tagonists clarify and express a deeper level of emotion and pre-
conscious ideation. This technique is also fairly readily integrated
with more conventional types of individual, family or group psy-
chotherapy.
FUNCTIONS
The double can provide a number of services, its functions being
similar to those described for the auxiliary in the previous chapter.
More specifically, this technique can be used for the following pur-
Poses:
1. Stimulating interaction. A double facilitates the portrayal of
the protagonist's psychological experience to its fullest
range.
2. Proaiding support. The double can encourage the protago-
nist, helping him to take more risks and enter the interac-
tion more completely.
3. Giaing ffictiae suggestions and interpretations.If the auxiliary
playing the double role has built a bridge of rapport
through his behavior, the protagonist is relatively open to
28

The Double
29
considering statements made by the double as if part of his
own self were speaking. Of course, it is imperative that the
director establish the norm in which the protagonist is free
to disagree with, modify, or expand on the double's state-
ment.
The empathy function of doubling can be used in many settings.
For example, in individual or family therapy, the therapist may use
a modified double technique in order to draw the client out further
(Hudgins & Kiesler, 1984,1'987; Leveton, 1991). I use a form of dou-
bling that I call actiae enryathy in these more conventional thera-
peutic contexts. I introduce the technique by saying something like
the following: "Now I want to understand you, so let me talk as if
I were in your situation. You correct me until I get it right." Then I
make inferences about what might not be explicitly expressed, but
perhaps felt or thought subconsciously. These are informed by my
(the therapist) having a broad experience regarding what others
have gone through under similar circumstances.
After speaking for 10 to 45 seconds in role, I pause and ask,
"How accurate aml?" I make it known that I want to be coached,
corrected, even to the appreciation of small nuances. During this
process the client figuratively shifts into the role of the director or
playwright and the therapist is momentarily like actors in the early
phase of rehearsal, iust learning to "feel into" the character they
are to play. In this way, the process of making "interpretations" is
greatly softened. Instead of the therapist as authority presuming to
know what a client feels, the role shifts to a fellow human seeking
to understand empathically, and being open to feedback until that
understanding is felt to be accurate by the client.
Active empathy in this way oPerationalizes the goal described
by Heinz Kohut as being a core technique in his "self psychology"
school of psychoanalysis (Kohut, 7971); and it further extends the
major principle of therapy described by Carl Rogers thirty years
earlier, that of giving empathic feedback (Rogers, 1959). Also, dou-
bling uses what Rogers called the "self-system," the wording
clients might use to describe themselves-in contrast to the jargon
typically used by therapists.

30
Acting-ln
THE TECHNIQUE OF THE DOUBLE
As a group or family technique, the double is selected in the same
way as the other auxiliary (see Chapter 2). (For purposes of illus-
tration, the double will be imagined as a woman and feminine pro-
nouns will be used.) The director introduces the double to the pro-
tagonist as follows:
Consider this person your double, your invisible self,
your alter ego with whom you may talk at times, but
who exists only within yourself. She may say things that
you may be feeling-things you would be hesitant to
express. If her statements represent your true feelings,
repeat that statement in your interaction. If what the
double says is not an expression of your feelings, say no.
This will negate what she says. You can then correct her
and she will then try again to better reflect your thoughts
and emotions. If your double can't help you effectively in
this way, you're free to dismiss her and we'll get some-
one else. (See, for example, dialogue in Chapter S, p.Zl.)
The director may use either of two minor variations of the tech-
nique. In the first variation only the protagonist may respond to
what the double says, and if the double's statement is to be
answered by the other people in the drama, the protagonist must
repeat it. The protagonist, thus, must take responsibility for what
transpires. Use of this method is indicated for relatively passive
protagonists. In the second alternative, what the double says is
spoken so that all may hear and it may be considered an open
expression of the protagonist's feelings, unless specifically contra-
dicted by the protagonist. This variant has the advantage of speed-
ing up the interaction.
As with the role of the auxiliary, there is no requirement that the
person chosen to play the double resemble the actual person she
portrays. "There is no age, sex, status, or race in psychodrama,,,
says Moreno. (lt is true that protagonists often pick people who
resemble the real person for auxiliary parts, but this is not neces-
sary.) Under any circumstances, if the auxiliary behaves even

I'he Double
3l
somewhat true to role, the protagonist fully accepts her in role
even as mother, wife, or double.
If there is role reversal in the enactment, the double should take
on whatever role the protagonist is involved in. Throughout the
enactment the double should continue to speak in the first person:
"l think," "l feel," and never (to the protagonist) "you think."
KINDS OF DOUBLING
In helping to express emotions, the double can emphasize or
amplify statements made by the protagonist. If the double stresses
that the protagonist is feeling something strongly but is not
expressing those affects, the double may speak out and ventilate
the anger, love, or whatever is experienced.
A good example of this occurred during a multiple-family ther-
apy group at a community mental health center where a daughter
lashed out at her father, accusing him of being unfair and stating
that she hated him. He trembled, but with his characteristic efforts
at self-control, responded, "Why do you hate me?" The double
stood behind him and shouted, "Damn it all! You're humiliating
me! I'm trying to be controlled, but, oh, that hurtl I want you to
love me!" At this, the father wept and agreed with the double, and
the interaction proceeded at a more intense pace. Other ways of
doubling are as follows:
Dranmtizing ttrc ftdittgs. An extension of the first approach of dou-
bling is the principle of maximizing the emotional content of an
attitude. Thus if the protagonist says, "l like you," the double can
say, "I need you"; "l'm irritated" becomes, "I hate you."
Obviously, this approach should be used only when it seems that
the maximizing expression is either accurate or would be produc-
tive in clarifying the protagonist's feelings.
Verbolizing nonuerbol cttnmrunicofiorts. Here the double begins to
add more "content" to the self-system of the protagonist. If the
protagonist smiles ingratiatingly, the double responds, "Why must
I smile when I speak to him?" A tense iaw or clenched fist may be

32 
Acfirtg-In
verbalized as, "This is getting me angry" (Tayloa 1983).
Physicalizing words and gestures. The double extends herself to hug,
cling, shove, or push the other auxiliaries in the interaction. She
may strike a pillow, cringe in a crouching position, or stand on a
chair to speak. This is dramatization in the nonverbal sphere.
support. The double reinforces the protagonist's right to his feel-
ings: "Dammit! Why should I live up to your expectations?', or,,,I
don't buy that load of crapl."; "It's okay if I feel like this!"
Questioning the self. The double questions the protagonist's atti-
tude;again, this mustbe used with discretion: "Maybe I'm kidding
myself," oq, "ls that how I really feel?"
Contradicting the feelings, The double contradicts the protagonist,
but only if she wants to evoke a reinforced statement or if she
believes the protagonist's self-system includes a stance opposite to
his statement: "Y'know, I don't really feel this way at alll";,'I don't
hate you, I need youl"; or, "l hate you and I love you!"
Defending against the feelings. The double actively verbalizes the
paradigms of the protagonist's habitual defense mechanisms of
denial ("This can't be happening!"), isolation ("I don't feel a
thing"), projection ("I would never feel toward you the way you
feel toward ffie"), displacement ("Dammit! Someone's got to fake
the blame!!"), and so forth.
self-obseraafion. The double notes the protagonist's general situa-
tion by introducing some comment on the protagonist's behavior:
"I seem to be getting more tense"; "Oh-oh,I'm explaining again,"
Related to this is the noting of emotions in the here-and-now: ,'I'm
talking about the past, but I'm feeling embarrassed now" The
double can also act as a counselor.. "Say,l'm reacting as if he's
judging me!"
lnterpretation. The double must be very sensitive in his introduc-
tion of materials that are outside the protagonist's awareness.

The Double
33
Commenting on what is nof being said is one form: "l'm not say-
ing anything about Dad, iust talking to Mom!" Referring to past
incidents or other issues is another form of interpretation: "I used
to feel this way as a kid!"
Interpretation of carry-oaer to other relationships. An important vari-
able to be remembered is that at times the protagonist is respond-
ing to those in his enactment on two levels: not only in terms of
who the other person as auxiliary is portraying (father, employer,
etc.), but also in terms of who the auxiliary is in real life. For exam-
ple, if the auxiliary role of father is being played by the person who
is also the protagonist's therapist in other settings, the statements
of the protagonist may reflect not only feelings toward the father,
but also feelings toward the therapist. (This is a kind of reverse
transference.) For example, in one session, the protagonist was
expressing a series of demands to his "father." The double then
added: "-nnd I'm not only saying this to you as my father, but
also as my therapisfl" This led to the protagonist's agreement and
a further shift of scene toward a reevaluation of the therapist-
patient relationship. This kind of doubling can be applied to the
generalization of other feelings, irrespective of who plays the other
auxiliary roles: for example, "I'm frightened of you...I'm frighF
ened of everybodyl" or "l've felt this way with all women!"
Satire. The use of humor in psychotheraPy and in doubling may be
one of the most delicate arts, but at times can be very effective:
"Yeah, I want it! I want love and guarantees arld obedience!" or, "Of
course I don't resent it! I like being put down!" The use of satire,
opposition, and provocation in doubling can add power to an
enactment if used with sensitivity and the proper timing. Without
the "art," the use of shock only leads to dissonance. The stubborn
double who believes that she is making an interpretation when she
repeats or amplifies her comments in the face of repeated denials
by the protagonist is only making a fool of herself or hurting the
protagonist.
Diaided double. Here the double is assigned to play a specific role or
part of the protagonist's psyche, usually made explicit by the

34
Acting-In
director. The double may be the obedient or the defiant part; the
self-blaming or the externalizing, self-justifying part. This }rees the
protagonist to clarify his feelings about the other, complementary
attitudes. In this technique the director may have moie than one
double for different parts of the protagonist. Thus two or three
doubles may be on stage.
Multiple doubles. The director may allow several people to express
their feelings to the protagonist as doubles. whereas the auxiliary
as a divided double plays one "complex" or part of the protago-
nist's psyche, as a multiple double, each auxiliary doubles for ihe
protagonist as a whole person. This technique is even more effec-
tive in sociodrama, or if the protagonist is enacting an issue that
involves others deeply. Again, it must be emphasized that it is stilr
the protagonist's feelings that must be clarified.
The group or collectiae double is an extension of the murtiple double:
This simply throws the interaction open to the audienle and has
them shout their double statements (always in the first person
tense) from the floor. sachnoff (1991.) describes a variation inwhich
group members spontaneously enter the scene, take the double
position, say a few things, allow themselves to be agreed with or
corrected, and then leave.
The auxiliary's double.In sociodramas, both parties in an interaction
may have a double. In general, in protagonist-centered psychodra-
mas, a double for an auxiliary can confuse the protagonist, because
as Zerka Moreno points out, this is an extra extension of the inter-
pretative process of the auxiliary (personal communication, 1994). If
the auxiliary isn't playing the role accurately (according to the per-
ception of the protagonist) then this should be corrected or a differ-
ent person assigned to that auxiliary role. However, in more socio-
dramatic interactions, the challenge is to bring out the possible feel-
ings of all parties, and then the stage may hold the protagonist, his
double, his "wife" (played by an auxiliary), the wife's double
(played by a third auxiliary), and possibly other roles and their dou-
bles (see Figure 3.1). This technique helps those playing the other
roles in the enactment to express their feelings more effectively.

The Double
35
Dbl. ft.
0ir
AEi DbI
AE,
Figure 3.1
Soliloquy. The double can be with the protagonist even when there
is no specific interpersonal interaction, that is, when enacting a
soliloquy. Examples would be "on the way home" scenes; "getting
ready for bed," or simply walking around the stage with one's
double, "talking to oneself out loud."
Doubling for audience . A double may be assigned to help the audi
ence express its feelings, positive or negative, toward the events on
the stage or any of the participants in the enactment, including the
director. For example, in a drama that had become "bogged down"
in overintellectualized verbosity, the audience double stood
behind some group members and stated, "I'm getting bored' I
want to help Mary reach out." This approach may catalyze a reac-
tion, which, in turn, may further the action in the drama.
Doubling in the want,-,tp. From the outset, the double can be used
to help the protagonist move toward readiness for action on the
stage. For example, the director is talking to a potential protago-
nist, and the trained auxiliary moves behind that "protagonist"
and begins to double: "Say, this is embarrassinS, having the direc-
tor put me on the spot. I thought I would iust observe."

36 
Acfing-In
Leveton (1992) has an especially good chapter on the double
technique which complements this chapter.
SOME SUGGESTIONS FOR DOUBLING
The tasks of helping another person to express his feelings may
seem imposing, but there are some approaches that can help the
potential double in her role. It is not true that an extensive histori-
cal background must be understood before one person can make
inferences about another's feelings. A great deal of information is
easily available from some very obvious cues. The double cannot
hope to be absolutely accurate, but will find that he or she is
empathizing "correctly" in over half the statements made if talk
focuses on three areas of the protagonist's life: his nonverbal com-
munications, his use of words, and the general roles and role tran-
sitions in which the protagonist finds himself. I will describe how
the double can draw inferences from these dimensions in this sec-
tion, and then suggest some exercises that can be used to practice
the skill of doubling.
The first group of cues for the double comes from the protago-
nist's nonverbal communications. By imitating the protigoniJt,s
posture, expression, gesture, and voice tone, the double experi-
ences the same kinds of body sensations as the subject. These sen-
sations act as somasthetic cues that provide the double with a
wealth of intuitive information about how the subject feels. For
exlmple, if a double were to imitate a protagonist who is slumped
in his chair, the sensation of the distribution of weight in that pos-
ture might suggest to the double the quality of the feeling of the
subject (e.g., it might help the double to discern whether the pro-
tagonist is sulking, or if he is really depressed). t would suggest
that the reader try out the following: unobtrusively imitate ottrers,
and to a surprising extent you find yourself "feeling" as they do
(Krainen, 1972).
The best physical position for the double is behind, slightly to
the side of, and facing the protagonist at about a 30. angle. From
this vantage point she can observe and imitate her subject without
being distractingly obvious. The proximity of this position may

The Double
37
facilitate a sense of symbolic identification. Rapport may be occa-
sionally heightened by the double's placing one hand on the pro-
tagonist's shoulder.
A second source of information for the double may be derived
from the way the protagonist uses words. As long as the double is
in the process of trying to understand his subiect, he or she should
try to get a feeling for the protagonist's "self-system." What kinds
of words, what connotations, what levels of abstractions does the
protagonist use? (Some knowledge of semantics is often very help-
ful in this regard.) In the early stages of doubling, the double
should try to paraphrase what the protagonist is most consciously
trying to express. Only later, after rapport has been established,
may the double go on to amplify, express, dramatize, and in other
ways extend the doubling to the many functions noted earlier in
this chapter. In the beginning, however, the double wants simply
to understand, and thus needs to listen almost uncritically. Any
caricaturization of the protagonist by the double in the early phas-
es will disrupt the relationship.
AIso based on the protagonist's use of words the double can
find clues as to how his subject is feeling from the discrepancy
between voice tone and content. If the protagonist speaks in an
emotion-filled voice about trivial issues, the double may be led
toward thinking about what that emotion means. On the other
hand, if the protagonist is speaking in a flat, affectless tone about
rather dramatic problems, the double may attend to (and later,
comment on) the defense mechanism of isolation of emotion.
The third major technique for the double's building an empath-
ic awareness of the protagonist is to comment on the obvious char-
acteristics of the most apparent of the protagonist's roles, such as:
(a) physical features, (b) stage in life, and (c) the challenges, advan-
tages, and disadvantages of any present or imminent life roles. It
is not necessary for the double to feel she must have the "whole
story" in order to make inferences about these roles, since the rela-
tionship permits mutual interactions and an error can easily be
corrected. Nevertheless, the double will find that a surprisingly
high proportion of her or his inferences will be accurate. Each
accurate response of the double develops rapport with the protag-

38
Actittg-In
EXERCISES FOR BUILDING THE CAPACITY FOR
DOUBLING
Here are some of the exercises that may be used for building
empathic skills; they also are excellent warm-up techniques.
Quality exchange.
The group breaks into pairs. All participants are instructed to list
on a piece of paper four qualities that they like about themselves
and four qualities that they dislike. After the lists are made, the
group members are instructed to exchange lists with their part-
ners. All of the pairs conduct the exercise simultaneously as they
onist while an inaccurate response is not alienating unless it is
extreme or humiliating.
For example, an auxiliary may make a number of statements in
the double role that might be part of the situation of anyone who
has a physical characteristic that is different from most of the peo-
ple in his social situation: a different or minority ethnic, racial, or
religious affiliation; being tall or short, overweight or thin; having
any disfiguring scars or unusual features; and so on. What does a
man feel when his hairline begins to recede? what special issues
concern someone who is short? The double can similarly make any
comments that would reflect feelings shared by most people at the
following stages in life: new parenthood, a promotion, approach-
ing retirement, the revelation of a serious illness, and so forth.
Related to the issue of role transition are the groups of feelings
that accompany most life roles in the sexual, family, vocationil,
social, and financial areas. what could any double iay about the
following situations: The man who reaches his fiftieih birthday
and whose income and status have not met his expectations, the
woman in her thirties who finds that her husband has recently
been unfaithful, or the young man who feels himserf fa[ing into a
vocational rut?
The double can thus utilize the inferences that any person can
make about a situation or quality, if she will give herself permis-
sion to take the risk of playing her hunches out loud.

The Double
39
sit around the room. One member of each pair starts off by read-
ing the partner's list. After reading each item, such as, "l am over-
weight," the person reading the list goes on to describe how it
might feel if this were their own personal quality. Drawing on any
actual experiences, the person speaks for about a minute, explor-
ing the inferences that can be made regarding the item on the list-
advantages, disadvantages, implications.
The partner whose list is being read is to listen but make no
reply until after both have finished the exercise. When one finish-
es reading and commenting on the partner's list, the other does
likewise. The exercise should take about 20 minutes. Only after
both partners have read each other's lists should they give feed-
back and engage in a discussion. It is unimportant whether or not
the participants are correct; what is essential is the willingness to
make intuitive inferences based on the qualities noted on the lists.
Sccret pooling.
This is a similar exercise for a group. Each SrouP member writes a
"secret" on a piece of paper. The secret should be about something
which the person would feel quite uncomfortable revealing to the
group. The papers are all folded in the same fashion and mixed
thoroughly with those of the others in the ErouP to ensure
anonymity. When the papers are redistributed members check
quickly to make sure they didn't pick their own secrets. Then, in
turn, each person reads out the secret as if it were a personal secret.
All participants speak in the first person and Bo on to explain
(making inferences and taking risks of interpretation) how it feels
to have that secret as part of one's own life history. Each person
speaks for about a minute, talking about the feelings and attitudes
that are associated with the contents of the secret.
It is often surprising and relieving to group members to find
that others talk about their anonymously written secrets with
empathy and kindness; the commonness of themes is also usually
striking in this exercise. Through the discovery of shared feelings
about emotional issues, the group moves toward greater SrouP
cohesion. This exercise, thus, serves many functions-developing
empathic skills as well as serving as a warm-up for further grouP
activities.

40
Acting-In
Directed fantasy double.
This is a Tgre playful exercise. The director speaks to the group as
follows: "Think of an object, animal, or character in a fai-rytaie-
and then become that thing. What is your future? past?,, The more
you do this, the more you will be ready to empathically move into
a variety of roles.
SUMMARY
The auxiliary and, in particular, the double are distinguishing
characteristics of psychod rama tic enactment tha t are contr-ib u tioni
to the field of action approaches in psychotherapy and education.
The opportunity for building the empathic skills of rore reversal in
the person who doubles is as important a function of the double
role as the powerful stimulus it provides to the protagonist.
REFERENCES / RECOMMENDED READINGS
Ferreira, A. (1961). Empathy and the bridge function of the ego, lournal of
American Psychoanalytic Aswciation, 9(t), St-tOS.
Goldstein, s..(1967). Effects of doubling_on involvement in group psychotherapy.
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research IPractice, 4(Z), SZ-$0.
Hudgins, M. _K.,. & Kiesler, D. J. (1984). lnstructional nnnual lor dortbling in indiaid-
ual psycltotherapy. Richmond: Virginia Commonwealtti Universit!.
Hudgins, M. K., & Kiesler, D.l. (1982).lndividualexperientialpsychotherapy:An
analogue validation of the intervention module of psycliodramatii'dou-
bling. Psychotherapy : Theory, Research & pract ice, 24(2), 245-ZSS.
Kohut, H. (1971). The analysis of the self. Monograph series of the psychoanalytic
study of the Child (No.4). New york: International Univeisities piess.
Krainen, l. M. (19721. Co-qtnplgying: A group therapy technique. Anrcrican
lournal of Psychiatry, 129(5), 600-601.
Leveton, E. (1991). The use of doubling to counter resistance in family and indi-
vidual treatment. The Arts in psyihotherapy, 18, Z4l-249.
Leveton, E. (1992). A clinician's guide to psyclrodranm (znd ed.). New york: springer.
Perrott, L. A. (1975). Doub-ling f.-oT u" existential-phenomenological viewpoint.
G ro up P sy cho t he ra py [t P sy chod r o nu, 2 8, 66-69.
Rogers, C. R- (1959). The essence of psychotherapy: A client-centered view. Annols
of Psychotherapy, 1, 5t-57.

The Double
4t
Sachnoff, E.A. (1991). Why and when to use "hit and run" doubling. lournal of
Group Psychotherapy, Psyclndrama I Sociometry, 44(ll, 4143.
Tayloa G. (1983). The effect of nonverbal doubling on the emotional respon-se -of
- the double. lournal of Group Psychotherapy, Psychodranu, & Sociometry, 36(2),
61-58.
Toeman, Z. (19461. The auxiliary ego, double, and mirror techniques, Socionetry,
9,178-"t83.
Toeman, Z. (1948). The double situation in psychodrama. Sociatry,l(4),43G448.

4
Warming-Up
To warm up to an activity is to become gradually more sponta-
neous and involved. In psychodrama spontaneity is a desirable
state, the best way that creativity can be generated. The warm-up
refers to the first phase of a psychodramatic enactment in which
group members become more comfortable rvith each other and the
task at hand. From this a protagonist and problem emerge leading
to the second phase, the action.
To conduct an effective warm-up it is necessary to appreciate the
importance and nature of the process of warming-up, because
without an effective warm-up many a role play or psychodramat-
ic enactment fails. I have been in group and family therapy ses-
sions in which the therapists erroneously expect the clients, own
anxiety to serve as the source of motivation. often this backfires,
especially with clients who have little tolerance for this nondirec-
tive or psychoanalytic technique-and nowadays this constitutes
the majority of the population.
Aside from its practical value, warming up has a great psycho-
logical value (Kippea 1967). Many people are delighted to be given
some structure and time to gradually get their mind focused and
active. I make this process explicit, and my clients and group mem-
bers seem to enjoy being encouraged to use these principles and
techniques in other settings too. It's nice to feel that one need not
have all his thoughts neatly packaged and ready for the consul-
tant's inspection, but that rather the process of exploration can
proceed gently towards clarity and discovery.
The principles of warming-up thus apply not only to therapy or
42

Wanning-Up
43
psychodrama but also to many areas of everyday life. Learning
how to optimize vitality and spontaneity may well be one of the
greatest challenges in our culture, and this skill requires a variety
of techniques and an appreciation of the importance of spontane-
ity as a core value (Blatner, 1988). This chapter will focus primari-
ly on the practical aspects of using warm-uP techniques in psy-
chodrama.
The most important issue in warming-up is the establishment of
a context that fosters spontaneity. The necessary conditions for
spontaneous behavior include (a) a sense of trust and safety; (b) a
receptivity to intuitions, images, feeling, and other non-rational
menlal processes; (c) a bit of playfulness-so one doesn't feel
overidentified with the success of every move in the process-and
(d) a movement toward risk taking and exploration into novelty
(Moreno, 1,947).ln addition, getting people moving, interacting,
and improvising are important.
The first phase of any SrouP activity involves the development
of some consensus as to the purPoses, methods, duration, dimen-
sions of the group and division of responsibilities in the grouP.
these issues first arise as the director warms herself up.
THE DIRECTOR'S WARM.UP
In order to warm uP a grouP a director needs to apply the prin-
ciples to herself. She may begin by introducing herself or getting to
know the group members, striking uP a conversation. To stand
and walk about or sit and talk? It depends on the norms of the
group and the organization. One shouldn't be too flamboyant in
certain settings, and a bit of drama is quite effective (if not expect-
ed) in others.
If she begins in a sedate fashion, then after introducing herself
and beginning to explain the process, she should gradually begin
to model it by becoming physically active, standing up, walking
aboul, moving chairs, talking with the SrouP about a variety of
topics, carrying on her introduction. Themes to be addressed

44
Acting-In
include a general orientation to the task of the group and to obtain-
ing some consensus on this, the time allocated to the group, and
other norms regarding who will be included. Related issues that
will probably be touched on are confidentiality, cost, people leav-
ing the group, bathroom breaks, smoking, and new people enter-
ing the group.
In addition, the director begins to talk about (and model) some
of the elements directly associated with psychodrama, such as
physical movement or shifting a chair's position. She can model
playfulness when demonstrating the taking of a role. Few things
are more counterproductive to a group's warming-up than a direc-
tor who continues to work from a sitting position. Movements and
an improvisational introduction also increase the director's own
spontaneity (see Figure 4.1).
Dir".
Figure 4.1
Part of the group's warm-up is to begin trusting and liking the
group leader, and this requires some self-disclosure on the
leader/director's part. What people really need to know is how
judgmental, shaming, authoritarian, mutual, flexible, playful, non-
defensive, and in other ways comfortable the director will b+and
by extension, this is what most of the group members are con-
sciously or subconsciously wondering about each other, also. So,
during her own warm-up, the director discloses some of her own

Warming-Up
45
style. If she can communicate a sense of authenticity and warmth,
her warming up begins to allow the group to know and trust her
(Sacks, 1967).Her behavior further models for the grouP the norms
of self-disclosure, spontaneity, acceptance of humor, toleration of
some distance (i.e., the acceptability of some reserve on the part of
the group members and a respect for some unwillingness to
engage in significant self-disclosure at first), and the acceptability
of action and forceful expression.
Spontaneity can only flower in a context of safety' It's difficult to
improvise if one is feeling vulnerable. So a vital element in the
warming up process is building a sense of connectedness and
trusting between the group and the director, and among the group
members. Moreno had a special word for this quality of interper-
sonal preference, fele, which suggest also elements of reciprocity,
and real dynamics-as opposed to transference-which are part of
any group process (Barbour, 194; Blatner,1994). (A phenomenon
of negative tele, a sense of mutual repulsion, has also been noted,
but spontaneity grows in a context of positive tele.) Sharing sPon-
taneous feelings and actions tends to promote tele.
Of course, during this first phase the director is also mentally
warming up to the task that lies ahead. She must be able to assess
the many factors that could affect the group Process: a skill that
only comes with extensive experience and reading (see Chapter
10). The director must also become aware of her own resistances to
the group, if any are Present. A director most commonly experi-
ences resistance to the grouP through her own lack of preparation
or through the presence of artificial expectations she may have.
Does the director feel she must "put on a show"? Does she have
stereotyped attitudes toward some of the group members? Does
she wish she could avoid dealing with the group's stereotypes of
herself?
The director may cope with these mixed feelings and expecta-
tions of herself using several techniques, all of which facilitate her
own warming-up. She may discuss her plans and apprehensions
in advance with a co-worker. As part of her introduction to the
group, she may review her own tolerance for the nonoccurence of
a "dramatic happening," thus clarifying her own position at the

46
GROUP COHESION
Acting-In
outset. or she may allow her own negative tele to be first on the
agenda for the group discussion or psychodrama (2. Moreno,
1958). of course, if a director feels a great deal of overinvolvement,
she should decline to direct, and if another potential director is
available, that person should be allowed to tike over the leader-
ship role.
In the next phase, following the basic self-introduction and her own
warm-up, the director helps to develop group cohesion-another
term for a growing degree of positive tele among the group mem-
bers. The first step in building a sense of group identity and'trust is
to get the group members to know each other. The director may
choose to employ a variety of introductory exercises. she canrnod-
ify these exercises to meet the purposes oi the group task.
In one activity, for example, the director asks each member to
find a partner to get to know. Then, in a few minutes she asks each
of the group members to introduce the partner to the group.
Themes to be elicited may include background, expectations of
the forthcoming group experience, or interesting aspects of the
other person's personality. Partners may be chosen aJ people one
knows, strangers, someone who seems very different from oneserf,
someone with whom one has felt some conflict, or one,s spouse.
A series of two-person (dyadic) strtrctured experiences may be
useful in order to have each group member not only meet but
experience something different with each partner. Nonverbal exer-
cises can also be included in these dyads: ,,talking,, with hands or
backs, trust walks, and so forth. (In the trust walk or brind walk, one
partner takes the blindfolded other on a little tour, emphasizing
the awareness of trust issues.)
The use of action exercises early in the group,s development
may blend into the use of other structured experiences that are
designed not only as introductions, but also aJ steps in building
trust, self-disclosure, and playfulness. They are also useful as an
introduction to a variety of modalities, such as guided imagination
and nonverbal communication.

Warnting-Up
GROUP TASK AND WARM.UP TECHNIQUES
47
The use of action exercises or structured experiences not only
works toward the task of building group cohesion, but also serves
to sensitize group members to those dimensions of their personal-
ities with which they have the greatest conflict-their "blind
spots." I find that about one fifth of any Eroup is unaffected by any
girre. exercise. Another fifth is quite affected-the technique real-
iy a.ors"s an awareness of some conflict area-and the rest of the
group is mildly affected. After several exercises, most of the Sroup
members become more aware of their own problems.
At this point, the director moves into developing a theme or
finding a protagonist. If the group is warming up slowly, or the
director would like to start at some distance, the discussion of
some topic of general interest may come next. Some further tech-
niques include:
The undirected runrnr-up. In groups that already know each other,
the director may simply wait in the background while the group
warms itself up, discussing and ioking about a variety of topics.
Often a common theme emer8es after several minutes, which the
director may capitalize on by turning it into an enactment'
The directed tolrnt-up.lf the group knows its own task, the direc-
tor simply starts with a discussion, or uses a concrete example
with which to explore sociodramatically some of the issues. This
has been called a dircctcd lulrnt-ttP by Yablonsky & Enneis (1956).
The sociodrama allows group members to explore the different
feelings, attitudes, and experiences of some common role.
Sometimes fictional, religious (e.g. Biblical or mythic), or political
roles are played. In such cases, the process may, for a while, look
like drama therapy, but the themes raised may then lead to a more
personal exploration by one of the grouP members. (However, if
the group is designed to explore general philosophical or social-
but not personal-issues, the director should ensure that a more
personal focus does not occur!)
After the group has developed some cohesion, the director dis-
cusses the group theme at a distance. The warm-uPs below are still
somewhat removed from real life.

48
Acting-In
The melodrama. Based on a traditional late lgth Century
American theatrical tradition, this set of dramatic clichds can bL
fun and a pleasant vehicle for loosening up. A group member
could possibly be the director. The members cbuld tlen i'audition,,
for the various parts of heroine, hero, villain, heroine,s mother,
father, or others. The basic plot is that the mortgage is to be fore-
closed unless the heroine gives herself to the viltain. The sawmill
or railroad tracks scenes follow, then the rescue. Improvisations
and "hamming it up" are encouraged. Fairy tales and myths can
also be enacted.
situation fesfs. situations that present a challenge can be pre-
sented to individuals or groups. Examples include the "lifeboat"
(who will be chosen to die?), "stranded on a desert island,, (how
will the group organize itself?), "the stranger in the town restau-
r.antl', "the employment interview," and so on. A range of dramat-
ic, fantasied, humorous, tragic, or frustrating situations, from
slight to extreme, can be used.
- _!!e _magic shop. This is an especially useful technique (Barbour,
1992; Leveton, 1992). The director has the group imigine a small
shop on the stage. The shopkeeper may be pliyed 6y a trained
auxiliary, a member of the group, or even 6y ine director. The
group is told that on the shelves of this magic shop all types of
wonderful qualities can be found. Anyone who wishes to buy may
come into the shop. Eventually someone volunteers to become thl
customer-protagonist.
The customer's first requests are often quite vague: I want
"love," "wisdom," "immortality," or,,succes3.,, As ttre first task,
the shopkeeper engages the customer in a discussion in order to
clarify more specifically what's wanted. From whom does the cus-
tomer want love? what conditions will be accepted? This conver-
sation should remain within the metaphor of a ihopkeeper simply
trying to understand what is desired. The more general the desire,
the more expensive or inexpensive it may be: ,,y6u want love from
everybody? Well, that will cost quite a bit more,,, says the shop-
keeper.
The negotiation of the price comprises the second task within
the technique of the magic shop. Money cannot be offered. The
shopkeeper explains that the only barter can be some quality or

Warming-Up
49
facet of the customer's life or personality that will be surren-
dered-something that someone else might wish to buy some day
from the magic shop. The price offered often leads to some
thought-provoking challenges:
Cusrouen: I'll give uP my selfishness for love!
Snopxespen: Are you willing to give up all of your selfishness?
Cusrousn: Well now...
The director may allow either the protagonist or the auxiliary-
shopkeeper to consult with the audience for their advice. What
would be a fair price for immortality?
Often a customer will claim an inability to think of something to
offer as payment. (The statement, "I don't know," betrays a Pas-
sive-deplndent stance and should be redefined as, "I'm having
difficulty thinking of something.") This situation not only demon-
strates the protagonist's passive style, but also can be a starting
point from which to explore the protagonist's lack of awareness of
inner resources.
Once the tentative bargain has been struck, the protagonist is
encouraged to try out the newly purchased qualities, or to show
how it feels to get along without the quality that was iust given up.
In follow-up symbolic enactments, the protagonist may find that
there is a greater need than previously realized for what was given
up. On the other hand, what was purchased may not be what was
eipected. For example, the man who wanted an agreeable wife
found that he was bored by the enactment of his ideal mate. The
woman who would give up "being controlling" felt too vulnerable
when she had to enact a situation blindfolded.
In summary, the magic shop is an excellent technique not only
for warming-up a grouP, but also for the PurPoses of clarifying
goals and examining the consequences of one's choices.
It may be modified for different settings, such as in working
with substance abusers (Rustin & Olsson, 1993)-
Guided fantasy. There is a wide variety of exercises in which the
director has the grouP members imagine a variety of general
themes, the details of which are filled in by each individual's
unique imagery. Picturing trips through one's own body, iourneys
through forests, mountains, houses, or into the sea are all common

50
Acting-ln
themes. This technique has also been called the directed daydream
method, and has become a major approach within the general
group of imagery-oriented therapies. The group can utilize these
methods individually, while working in dyads, or they can share a
fantasy together as a group (Leuner, 1969).
Another major group of warm-ups are those derived from the
related fields of the creative arts therapies.
Creatiae dramatics. Theatre games and exercises from the mime
can be adapted as warm-ups for psychodramatic enactments.
Activities derived from improvisational dramatics are widely uti-
lized in school settings and can easily lead to explorations of more
meaningful issues (Spolin, 1963). Drama therapy techniques are
especially useful in this regard (Emunah, l9g4).
My wife and I have created a variation on creative dramatics by
adapting psychodrama as a form of recreation which we call The
Art of PIay (Blatner & Blatner, 1988). This activity is used just to
allow people to experience the richness of playing a role from
one's own imagination. Also, in training workshops I often use a
technique we've called "the talk-show-host game', in order to
develop the skill of role taking (Blatner & Blatner, 1991).
Dance/Moaenrcnt. Exercises from dance and movement therapy
which lead to spontaneity and involvement in expressiveness can
easily be part of any warm-up. Related to the field of dance are the
activities derived from body movement, sensory awakening,
bioenergetics, and rhythmical group rituals. simple voiced intona-
tions-chants, grunts, repetitive noises-can all be added to
emphasize breathing and expressive action. These warm-ups not
only generate a great deal of readiness for action, but also establish
a norm of physical involvement within the group.
Music. The group members can create and/or play simple
instruments in an improvisatory style. The interplay can be height-
ened by a mixture of making music, voice sounds, and body move-
ment. The introduction of simple musical instruments, elementary
circle dance, and stretching activities is especially valuable in
working with patients who have been passive or institutionalized
for long periods (Chace, 1945).

Warming-Up
5l
Background music may also be an effective catalyst to group
interaction. The lyrics of many contemPorary songs can sugSest
common emotional themes for group discussion. A music thera-
pist can provide recordings that reflect different moods in music
with which to accompany and heighten the flow of action in many
enactments (I.I. Moreno, 1980).
Artistic materials. Paints, clay, papier-mdch6, pastels, crayons, fin-
ger paints, colored sand, and a wide variety of collage materials can
all be adapted to a group setting. Starting with ideas derived from
art therapy, the group can move from the creative media to enact-
ments and then back to further involvement in artistic creation.
One example of the use of artistic materials is shared drawings.
Working in dyads, group members take turns in creating a picture
together. After about five to fifteen minutes, they share their expe-
rience and picture with the grouP. Applied to a couples grouP, a
variant involves each pair drawing a picture of their relationship
without using any words.
All of the approaches above can become warm-uP techniques
that emphasize spontaneity and a validation of the creative dimen-
sions within the self. Each director will undoubtedly improvise a
variety of modifications of any of them. |ames Sacks (1'967), for
example, combines elements of many different approaches in one
of his warm-ups. The group members form a fairly tight circle, sit-
ting on cushions or low seats, leaning forward. In turn, members
state their names (or nicknames) and mention what they hope to
achieve in the group session. Each person's entire statement is to
be no greater than one sentence in length. Other directions follow:
"Share with the grouP something they don't know about you."
"Tell an old, old memory." "Name someone with whom you have
unfinished business." At this point, the one-sentence rule may be
lifted. The group members are then asked to dictate a letter to the
person with whom they have unfinished business' This technique
is likely to be useful in building group cohesion, encouraging self-
disclosure, and developing themes and protagonists for future
enactments.

s2
Acting-In
There are literally hundreds of other structured experiences or
warm-up techniques, and books or articles describing many of
them are noted in a special section at the end of this chapter,s
references.
THE SELECTION OF A PROTAGONIST
There are many ways in which a protagonist may emerge out of
the group process:
1. The protagonist may volunteer in that or an earlier session.
The director may want to have the group vote on whom is to be
dealt with if there are several volunteers, or she may arbitrarily
choose in what order they will be protagonists. The director may
simply wait quietly until someone does volunteer, but the director
has to know where to use this approach or it may backfire. Some
Broups will simply not respond.
2. The protagonist may be preselected by the therapists.
3. The director may walk around and converse with different
people in the group until she finds someone who is ready to be the
protagonist. (See Figure 4.2)
?
Figure 4.2

Warming-Up
53
4. She may give a short talk on some theme, tell a story that
seems relevant to the group's interest, and see if that can remind
the group of issues which they might wish to explore further. This
may encourage a protagonist to volunteer.
5. The protagonist may emerge out of the natural ongoing SrouP
process. This occurs when the group arrives and is catalyzed into
some natural joking or discussion of a topic. This spontaneity
should not be suppressed by an unspoken or explicit "Let's get
down to business," which has the effect of a wet blanket on a fire.
Many people find talking about their problems humiliating, and
such a suggestion invariably quenches spontaneity in a grouP.
Instead, the director should wait. She may even go along with the
joking, trusting that she can gently turn it into a meaningful issue.
Eventually both a theme and a protagonist emerge (Kumar &
Treadwell, 1986).
6. Action sociometry. Using spectrograms, sociodramas, or other
group-centered methods, a protagonist may emerge as one who is
especially concerned about something triggered in the discussion.
Moreno developed methods in the early 1930s whereby grouP
members could systematically give themselves feedback regarding
attitudes of the members towards each other and in relation to
some specific theme. Paper-and-pencil tests could be given in
which the results were correlated and presented to the group. Or
group members can be asked to position themselves around the
room. In new groups, group members can place their hands on the
shoulders of those whom they've known before this group began;
or to place themselves on an imagined map to show what part of
the locale-region or even world-they come from (Seabourne,
1e63).
If a group theme is present, either one that the group has
expressly met to consider, or one arising in the course of the group
process, often there will be some aspect of that theme which is at
least potentially controversial. The group will want to know where
people stand on this issue. A commonly used technique in such
cases is that of the spectrogrant, a type of action sociogram in which
the group members place themselves at some point along an imag-
inary line which reflects their self-perceptions regarding some

54
Acting-In
issue, from the "most" to the "least." This spectrum of responses
gives the group an clearly observable demonstration of the distri-
bution of feelings regarding the theme in question (Kole, 1967).
In addition, in order to stimulate a protagonist, or to help him
become more involved in his life situation, the director can use
more individual-centered warm-ups:
7. The auxiliary, or "empty," chair technique, is commonly used
for warming-up as well as during the action phase of a psy-
chodrama (Lippitt, 1958). The director puts forward an empty
chair and says, "There is someone sitting in this chair-someone
important to you. Visualize that person, what he or she is doing,
wearing, possibly thinking about. . . . When it's clear to you, raise
your hand." Then when most have indicated they have seen some-
one, the director may proceed to ask whom they see in the chair.
The director may ask no one in particular and wait for volunteers,
or address her question to a specific person. When someone
responds, he is either asked to be that person (and sit in the chair)
or is asked what he has to say to whomever he sees in the chair.
This can lead to a brief interchange, which may lead to a further
enactment.
A variation of this was shown me by Pam and Rory Remer:
Members of the group walked around in a circle and addressed
"themselves" in the empty chair, one at a time, giving themselves
advice about their lives. In this way, the technique is a kind of solil-
oquy formed as a quasi-dialogue. Further variations establish the
figure in the chair as oneself when younger, or require the person
talking to the self to imagine that he or she is significantly wiser,
older, and more mature.
During an enactment, the auxiliary chair can also be used when
the protagonist has difficulty relating to a real person. The chair in
this sense becomes the major instrument in monodrama. (See
Figure 2.7,p.24.)
8. "Family scttlpture" is another type of action sociogram. The
director helps the protagonist present his relevant social network
as if they were a group of sculptures in a diorama, or a three-
dimensional painting (see Figure 4.3). This technique has been
incorporated into family therapy, but it should be noted that it was
taken from psychodrama (Constantine, 1978). The sculpture tech-

Warnting-Up
55
Figure 4.3
nique can be applied to other nonfamily social networks, too, such
as a person's co-workers at the office, the politics of a church
group, one's school classroom (Leveton, 7992: 74; Hotley &
Strickland, 7984).
The action sociogram, or "sculpture" begins with the protago-
nist placing someone in the grouP (as an auxiliary) to represent
himself, and then one by one other significant figures in his per-
ceived social network are chosen and, with facilitation by an ongo-
ing dialogue with the director, placed in positions that symbolical-
ly represent their perceived distance, attitude, and quality of rela-
tionship with the protagonist. Finally, the protagonist gives each
figure in the scene a characteristic sentence or phrase to speak,
which symbolically brings them to life. He then steps back and
observes, or enters the scene and begins to relate to his family or
central group.
Another variant of the sculpture type of action sociogram is the
use of physical objects-a grouP of coins of various denomina-
tions; a chess se| or a set of hand puppets (preferably of ani-
mals)-to represent the protagonist's relevant social network. The
protagonist is instructed to identify the chess piece (Schw ab,7978)
fr

56
Acting-In
or hand puppet of his choice with one of the people in his social
network. [t is often interesting for example, to watch a protagonist
pick the mouse hand puppet or the pawn for the father, the bear
puppet or bishop for the brother, and so forth. Which figure,
where it is placed, and what it does can then serve as clues for
understanding the protagonist's experience of his or her family
relationships.
9.The Social Network Diagram. One of the most useful warm-ups
I've found is that of simply having everyone draw a diagram of
their own social network, that is, the five to fifteen most significant
people in their lives. (Moreno called this complex of the individual
and his or her relevant social network "the social atom," attempt-
ing to indicate the organic essence of his sociological vision but I
find that term too idiosyncratic.) Placing themselves at the center
of a wheel-like figure, and indicating with the lines drawn from
the central symbol to the symbols of the various characters what
kinds of feelings are sensed in the relationship, participants quick-
ly capture much of great relevance (Buchanan,1984; Tayloa 1984).
(See Figure 4.4.)
The lines indicate the feelings of the subject toward the others
up to the midpoint mark. The feelings the subiect believes the oth-
ers to have are shown from their symbol back to the midpoint. The
woman in Figure 4.4 has ambivalent feelings toward her father
and her father has positive feelings toward her. She and her
fiancee's ex-wife both have negative feelings towards one another.
Of particular note is the deceased grandfather to whom she has
positive feelings which she believes would be reciprocated.
Th9 number of people included in a social network diagram
should be those who are active in a person's psychologicar life.It's
important to note that pets and deceased persons be recognized
when they play significant roles. This diagram represents a per-
son's "object relations," those whom one needs, carls about,loves,
and hates, enough to be worthy of consideration if one were in
therapy.

Warming-Up
FIANCEE'S
EX-WIFE
DECEASED
GRANDFATHER
57
FATHER
PET
MOTHER
BROTHER
ROOMMATE
FIANCEE
FRIEND
ATWORK
SUPERVISOR
ATWORK
OLD
BOYFRIEND
The subject, X, in this case a woman, is placed in the center of the dia-
gram. various relationships are indicated using the following symbols:
= femole
The lines tepresent the feellngs:
Positive
\r\.a/\r1^ ,\/a/1/ negotlve
4;b
o"""or"o = ( )
neutrol
\n \N\r\nN 
ombivolent
Figure 4.4 The Social Network Diagram
After diagramming, I have grouP members pair off and share
with a partner the meaning of their drawing. In addition to
reminding people of the web of social relations and roles which
constitute so much of their experience, this technique also helps to
promote a therapeutic alliance and a beginning diagnosis in indi-
vidual therapy.

58
Acting-In
MOVING INTO ACTION
After the protagonist has emerged from the group, the last phase
of the warm-up remains. The basic issue is discussed with thi pro-
tagonist. "Yes, that issue troubles me," is the essence of the con-
tract. "Let's work on it," says the director, and the protagonist is
led gently by the hand to the staging area.
Depending on his readiness, the protagonist may sit at the sec-
ond level edge of the stage, and the director sits with him (Figure
4.5). often the director and protagonist stand or walk uro.rnd irt
the staging area as they discuss the issue in order to arrive at a spe-
c
oc
Figure 4.5
I hove o conflict
with nq fu5,,

Warming-Up
59
cific example: a place or a Person. At this point the enactment
moves to the third level of the stage, if one is being used.
The director takes an aPProPriate cue that points to an enact-
ment and suggests it. If a name of someone who seems important
to the protagonist is mentioned, an interaction with that Person
might be the "first scene." Lf a time of life is mentioned, the direc-
tor moves toward a specific memory or image.
During the warm-up, the protagonist is helped to engage in
increasing activity. When a protagonist is warmed up to an unusu-
ally high pitch he will almost direct the drama by himself.
if, dlring the warm-up, the protagonist shows increasing anxi-
ety manifested by resistance, the director must shift the enactment
inio a less emotionally loaded sphere of exploration while still con-
tinuing the action. This is similar to the Process of desensitization
by imigery and relaxation in the treatment of phobic patients: If
the client indicates that he is picturing a scene that makes him too
tense, the therapist allows him to return to a less frightening image
with which he can relax, but the therapy continues. Similarly, if the
protagonist "freezes," the director may ask him to soliloquize, or
to use one of the following warm-up devices:
. Hand puppets. A puppet show can often be an effective
warm- up, while giving the protagonist some distance (Kors,
1964). The use of masks may have a similar function
(Leveton, 1992; Melson & Thurman,'l'982).
o Blnckout. The entire theater is blacked out, although all
actions continue as if there would be full daylight. This is
done so that the protagonist may go through a painful expe-
rience unobserved, and so the ProtaSonist can retain the
experience of solitude.
. Turn your back. A protagonist is occasionally embarrassed to
present a particular episode while facing the group. He is
lhen permitted to turn his back to the group and to act as if
he were alone, in his own home, or wherever the episode
takes place. Once the protagonist has reached a sufficient
degree of involvement, he is then ready to carry on facing
the audience.

60
Acting-In
' Portrayal of a dream. This offers an excellent first enactment
for a protagonist's exploration of his problem. It is often
used in Gestalt therapy, and is discussed further in the next
chapter.
o Hypnodrama.The protagonist is hypnotized and then helped
to enact his situation in a hypnotic state (Enneis, 1950;
Moreno, 1950).
. Subgrouping. The group breaks into dyads and small groups
which do various structured exercises together.-Kroll,
Mikhailova and Serdiouk (1992) found it necessary to use
this and other modifications in order to deal with the special
circumstances of people in Russia, and serves as a model
inviting the spontaneity of other directors internationally to
adapt these approaches to their own cultures.
After a sufficient warm-up, the protagonist is usually ready to
enter the second phase of the psychodrama-the action-wlrich
will be discussed in the next chapter.
SUMMARY
The warming-up process is the first and an essential part of any
enactment and is based on the fundamental need for any person to
gradually develop increasing involvement and spontaneity
through goal-directed physical action. In referenc" to g.orp
process, the warm-up phase applies to the components of 1a; tne
director-'s warm-up, (b) building group cohesion, (c) developing a
group theme, (d) finding a protagonist, and (e) moving the pro-
tagonist onto the stage.
REFERENCES / RECOMMENDED READINGS
Barbour, A. (1992). P-urp9s9 and strategy behind the magic shop. lournal of Group
P sy chot he r apy, P sy chod r ama I Soc io m e t ry, 45 (3), 9l-701.
Barbour, A. (1994). A reexamination of the tele eftect. lournal of Group
P sy c ho the r apy, P s y chod r a nn I S oc iome t ry, 47 (3), 11 4-125

Warming-Up
6l
Blatnet A. (1988). Spontaneity. ln Foundations of psychodrann (pp.63-71)' New
York: Springer.
Blatner, A. & Blatner, A. (1988). The Art of Play: An adult's guide to reclaiming imag-
ination and spontaneity. New York: Human Sciences Press.
Blatner, A. & Blatnec A. (1991). Imaginative interviews: A psychodramatic warm-
up for developing role-playlng skills. /ourral of Group Psychotherapy,
P sy chod r a n n €t So c io n u' t r y, 4 4(3), 715-120.
Blatner, A. (1994). Tele: The dynamics of interpersonal preference. In P. -Holmes,
M. Karp, & M' Watsbn (eds.), Psyclndranru since Moreno' London:
Tavistock/Routledge.
Buchanan, D. R. (1984). Moreno',s social atom: A diagnostic and treatment tool for
exploring interpersonal relationships . Thc Arts itr Psychotherapv, 11 , 155-164.
Chace M., (19a5). Rhythm and movement as used in St. Elizabeth's Hospital.
Socionrct ry, 8, 481-483.
Constantine, L. L. (April, 1978). Family sculpture and relationship mapping tech-
niques. Journal of Morriage & Fantily Counseling, 4,1T23.
Corynetz, P. (1945). The warming-uP Process of an audience. Socionrclry, S(H),
21u225.
Emunah, R. (1994). Acting for rea!: Dranm therapy, lrrocess, tcchnique, and perfor-
rror,lcc. New York: Brunner/Mazel.
Enneis, J. M. (1950). The hypnodramatic technique. Groult Psvchothcrapv, 3(l\,
11-40.
Enneis, J. M. (1951). The dynamics of group and action processes in therapy.
Croup Psychothcrapll, 4('l), 17 -21.
Horley, J. & Strickland, L. H. (1984). A note on Jacob Moreno's contributions to the
development of social network analysis. lrturnal of Connrunity Psycholog,v,
12(3),2e1-2e3.
Kippec D. A. (1967). Spontaneity and the warming-up Process in a new light.
G rou p Psychotlrcrnptl, 20(ll, 62-73.
Kole, D. (1967). The sPectrogram in psychodrama. Group Psrlchttthcrapy,20(1-2),
5k1.
Kors, P. C. (1964). Unstructured PuPPet shows as group pnrcedures in therapy
wi th child ren . Psy chiat ric Quar t a rl y S ultpl cnrcn t, i$(ll, 56-75.
Kroll, L. M., Mikhailova, E. L., & Serdiouk, E. A. (1992). Pre-warm-up in Russian
psychodrama groups: A cultural approach. lournal of Group Psychotherapy,
Psvchodrama tt Socionrct ry, 45(21, 5l-62.
Kumar, V. K. & Treadwell, T. W. (1986). Identifying a protagonist: Techniques and
factors. ltturnal of Group Psychothcrapy, Psyclndrann & Sociomctry, 38(4),
155-164.
Leuner, H. C. (1969). Guided affective imagery' Anrcrican lournal of Psycholherapy,
23(1),4-22.

62
Acting-In
Leveton, E. (1992). A clinician's guide to psychotlrann (2nd ed.). New york: springer.
Lippitt, R. (1958). Auxiliary chair techniq ue. Croup psychotherapy, 11(1-2),9-29.
Martin, R. B. (1991). The assessment of involvement in role playing. loumal of
Clinical Psychology, 47, 587 -596.
Melson, s I. & Thurman, w. (1982). The making of masks in psychotherapy.
P sy chiat r i c An nals, 1 2('tZ), 3G39.
Moreno, I' I. (1980). Musical psychodrama: A new direction in music therapy.
lournnl of Music Therapy, 17(t), 3442.
Moreno, l. L. (1947). The theatre of spontaneity. Beacon, Ny Beacon House.
Moreno,J. L. (1950). Hypnodrama and psychodrama. Group psychotherapy, 3(ll,
1_10.
Moreno, Z.T. (1958). The "reluctant therapist" and the ,,reluctant audience,, tech-
nique in psychodrama . Group Psychothernpy, 11, 278-292.
Moreno, Z. T. (1959). A survey of psychodramatic techniques. ACTA
P sy c hot he rape ut ic a, 7, 197 -206.
Pankratz, L., & Buchan,_G. (19_65). Exploring psychodrama techniques with defec-
tive delinquents. Croup Psyclrctherapy, iApy, tZO-t+t
Rustin, T' A., & olsson, P. A. (1993). sobriety- shop: A variation on magic shop for
addiction treatment patients. Journal 6f croip psychotherapy, psy"chodrnin €t
Soc io nre t r y, 4 6(1), 12-23.
Sacks, J. M. (1967). Psychodrama, the warm-up. Group psychotherapy, 20(4),
118-121.
schwab, R. (1978). Use of a chess set: An application of psychodramatic and socio-
metric techniques. Group Psychothernpy, psychodrimi & Socionrctry, 3l,4145.
seabourne, B. (1963). The action sociogram. Group psychotherapy 16(3),145-155.
spolin, v. (1963). lntprooisations for the thcnter. Evanston, IL: Northwestern
University Press.
Thyloa l. .A. (1984). The diagno-stic use of the social atom. lournal of Group
P sy c ho t h e r a py, P sy chod r a n m €t S oc i o m e t r y, 37 (2), 67 -g4.
warner, G. D. (1970). The didactic auxiliary chair. croup psychotherapy, 23(l-2),
3t-34.
weiner, H' A., & Sacks, f . M. (1969). lvarm-up and sum-up. Group psychotherapy,
22(t-2),8s-102.
Yablonsky, L., & Enneis, j. M. (1956). psychodrama, theory and practice, In F,
Fromm-Reichman & J - L. Moreno (Eds.) progress in-ltsychotherapy, Vol. 1.
New York: Grune and Stratton.
Miscellaneous Warm-Up Techniques, Structured Experiences:
Bond, T. (7986). cnntes for social and life ski//s. Cheltenham, England: stanley
Thornes.
Brandes, D., & Phillips,H. (1978). Ganrcsters'handbook:140 gamesfor teachers and

Warnting,-U1t
63
group leotlers. Cheltenham, England: Stanley Thornes.
Brandes, D. (1982). Gatttcslcrs' handbook fttro. London: Hutchinson.
Caesar H., Florence 8., Carroll R.D., et al. (1983). Conrnrunicate! A utorkbook for
interparsonol deuelttpnrcnt, (3rd ed.). Dubuque, IA: Kendall-Hunt'
Dayton, T. (1990). Drann gnnrcs: Techniqucs for self-dcaelopruent. Deerfield Beach,
FL: Health Communications, Inc.
Dynes, R. (1990). Crcatiaa ganrcs in groupuork. Bicester, England: Winslow.
Jennings, S. (1986). Craotiztc dranm in group uork. London: Winslow Press.
Kranz, P. (1991). A demonstration of warm-up techniques with young children.
lournnl of Group Psrlclrctlrcrapy, Psychotlrnnn & SttcionrctrV, 43(4),162-166.
Malamud, D. I. & Machover, S. (1965). Totwrd self'understanding: Group techniques
in sclf-confronlallorr. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
Morris, K. T., & Cinnamon, K. N. (1974). A handbook of aarbol group exercises. San
Diego: Applied Skills Press.
Morris, K. T., & Cinnamon, K. N. (1975). A handbood of non-vubal grtutp cxcrcisas.
San Diego: Applied Skills Press.
Otto, H. A. (1970). Croult nrcthods to nctuolizc lunmn pttlcntinl: A honclbook' Beverly
Hills: Holistic Press.
Pfeitfer,J. W., & Jones, J. E. (1969-71). Structurcd ex1reriance for hutnon rclations train'
irrg (Vols. 1-3). lowa City: University Associates.
Pfeiffer, I. W. (1989). Thc t'ttcycloyrt'clin ttf group octittities. San Diego: University
Associates.
Robbins, M. (1973). Psychodramatic children's warnr-uPs for adults' Crotr;r
P sy cl rt t h c r o 1t 11 {t P srt c I utd r a n n, 25 (l -2), 67 -7 l.
Russell, l. (1975). Personal growth through structured group exercises. In R. M.
Suinn & R. G. Weigel (Eds.), T/rc innoantipc ltsychttlttgicol tharnltit's: Critical and
crL'ntiu' contriltutittrrs (pp. 126-135). New York: Harper & Row.
Streitfeld, H. S., and Lewis, H. R. (1971). Cr<tzuth gnrrr's. New York: Harcourt,
Brace, Jovanovich.
Stevens, J. A. (1971). Atutrcil(ss: Exploring, $pari,nL'nti,r9, axParienci,lg. Lafayette,
CA: Real People Press.
Thayer, L. (Ed.). (1976, 1981). Fifty strategics fttr cxperientinl learning. (Books I, II).
San Diego: University Associates.
Weathers, L., Bedell, J. R., Marlowe, H., Gordon, R. E., Adams, J., Reed, V., Palmer,
J., & Gordon, K. K. (1981). Using psychotherapeutic Sames to train patients'
skills. In R. E. Gordon & K. K. Gordon, Syslorrs of trcotnntrt for tht'nrcntolly ill
(pp. 109-12a). New York: Grune and Stratton, 1981.
Zweben,J. E., & Hammann, K. (1970). Prescribed Sames: A theoretical perspective
on the use of Broup techniques. Psrlchotheraprl: Tlrcory, Rcsearch I Practice,
7(11,22-27.

I5
The Action
Following the warm-up of the group and the selection of the pro-
tagonist, the psychodramatic process enters its second phase, the
action, which involves the exploration of the protagonist,s prob-
lem. The logic of the progress of scenes in a classical psychodrama
has been illustrated in a diagram (Figure 5.1) developed by
Goldman and Morrison (1984). This "psychodramatic spiral,,
shows the shifting of location and time of scenes used in exploring
a typical problem.
While every psychodramatic enactment is unique, in general the
action will start with an enactment of some aspect of the present
situation, in an attempt to help the protagonist also express the
underlying feelings and thoughts that accompany his behavior.
Then other scenes are played, either in different relationships or,
more often, in the past, which also reveal common concems or pat-
terns. Then the action moves into scenes that may have given rise
to the basic attitudes and reactions that seem to be problematical
for the protagonist.
In portraying core conflicts, protagonists often reexperience the
original emotions of grief, fear, anger, longing, shame, guilt, or
confusion. Expression of these feelings involve a process of cathar-
sis (Blatner, 1985a). The challenge is then to help the protagonist
find ways of constructively re-owning feelings which may have
been repressed. Scenes involving expression of more vulnerable
feelings need to be followed by scenes bringing forth feelings of
effectiveness and hope. This two-stage process explains Moreno,s
dictum, "every catharsis of abreaction should be followed by a
64

CHILDHOOD
tI
I
EABLY
Oeeper
Past
SCENE 4-------
TION
Pasl
SCENE 2
Recenl
I
I
\I
The Action
65
FULL CIRCLE
Role Training
PRESENTING PROBLEM
SCENE 1
Pre3ent
Orienled
SCENE 2
Recenl
Presenl
Figure 5.1
catharsis of integration," in which the protagonist reclaims some of
the vitality and power associated with previously disowned
aspects of self.
These phases of the process are illustrated diagrammatically in
Figure 5.1 as the protagonist is helped to "spiral in" towards an elu-
cidation of the "core" issues and then "spiral out" while applying
those insights in expanding or training more aPPropriate role
behaviors. The integration process, discussed in the next chapter,
can involve a number of scenes which help consolidate gains
through behavioral rehearsal. Or, further elements of "unfinished
business" may be brought to the surface for psychodramatic explo-
ration. Since each protagonist's situation has its own individual ele-
ments, there are no hard and fast rules about the sequence of scenes.

66
Acting-In
PRESENTATION OF THE PROBLEM
When the protagonist is selected, he is brought toward the stage
and encouraged to describe his situation. As the director discusses
the protagonist's problem, a specific example is sought. If the pro-
tagonist begins to narrate the situation, the director encourages
him to portray the scene, rather than talk about what happened
(Figure 5.2). In the following vignette, the protagonist, whose
name is Joe, will be helped to psychodramatically explore a per-
sonal situation in his life. Joe begins to tell the director and group
about it:
Figure 5.2
Joe: Well, I had this fight with my boss.
Director: Show us, don't tell us. (The director gets up and invites ]oe
into the stage area.) Where does the scene happen?
Joe: It was in the office.
Director: It is in the office-it's happening now! Let's see the office.
Where is the boss's chair? ..desk? ..Are you sitting or stand-
ing? (Figure 5.3)
The director (who in the stick figure illustrations wears glasses)
continues to speak as if the situation were occurring in the here-
and-now, which brings a greater degree of immediacy to the
process. The director both models speaking in the present tense

Ihe dak is orcr here,..
There is o cluir.
The Actiort
67
ap
Figure 5.3
and reminds the protagonist to do so. This redirection may have to
be repeated several times, because protagonists often lapse into
narrating the situation as if it were in the past or in the subjunctive
sense, that is, how it "might" be, or, "maybe would be." These are
subtle linguistic distancing maneuvers, very common in our cul-
ture, but they interfere with people's experiencing clarity in their
action, thinking, and deciding. With encouragement, protagonists
often become warmed-up and involved, suspending much (but
not all) of the awareness that they are is "iust pretending.".
The director has the protagonist move around the stage, visual-
izing the scene in its particulars. As the protagonist describes the
scene, the director asks him to amplify the descriptions, to physi-
cally point out the furniture, "feel" the textures of the materials,
note the colors, the temperature, the weather-all concrete sensa-
tions that immerse him even more deeply in the enactment. In
other words, the sensory immersion techniques of the great acting
teacher and director Konstantin Stanislavski also have some rele-
vance to the process of helping a protagonist warm up to a scene
(Lippe, 1992). The setting of the stage is for the protagonist's ben-
q

efit as much as for the audience's. It may be as brief or prolonged
as the director feels is necessary in order to maximize the protago-
nist's continuing warm-up.
The physical involvement of setting up the props, moving the
chairs or tables into place, or putting on a piece of fabric as a shawl
or gown can further the warming-up process. And as the enact-
ment progresses, the director should attempt to maintain an opti-
mal level of actual movement in order to avoid becoming bogged
down in a wordy interaction (one of the most common pitfalls of
directing). Later in the psychodrama, the director continues to use
a variety of scene changes, role reversals, standing on chairs, push-
ing, climbing over furniture, and many other techniques in order
to keep up the pace of action.
68
Acting-ln
BRINGING IN THE AUXILIARY
As the scene is set, the auxiliaries are chosen and encouraged to
move immediately into their roles. Joe is asked to pick someone in
the group (call him Bill) to be the auxiliary (Figure 5.4).
a oqoo
Dill,r'11 aou plat lhc
boss,l'1c' lohcs ?
Figure 5.4

The Action
69
Bill comes on stage and the director immediately warms him up to
his role:
Drnecron:
AuxtLlanv:
Drnecror:
Jor:
DrRrctttn:
Joe:
Drnrcron:
AuxlLrlnv:
Mr. Jones, you asked Joe to come in today. He can't hear
you right now. As if you were iust thinking out loud to
yourself, giving a soliloquy, let's hear what you have to say
regarding why you want to see him.
(Bill, as Mr. Jones) Well, Joe hasn't been performing very
well at his job. (Figure 5.5).
A.e. il
o oo oo o
Figure 5.5
(glancing at foe) Is that riBht?
No, that's not it. My work is fine.
Change parts-that is, reverse roles. Joe, be Mr. Jones and
begin the encounter.
(as Mr. Jones) Look, Joe, this is the third time this week
you've come in late.
Change parts and start again. Mr. Jones? (Aside to Bill as
auxiliary, warming him up). Repeat the last line.
(Mr. Jones) Look Joe, this is the third time this week you've
come in late.
at do
Jocs

70
Acting-ln
Figure 5.6
Joe: But, Sir, when I took this job, we agreed that because of my
having to take care of my kids my work time would be
adjusted! (Figure 5.6).
AuxtLtnny: Well, your co-workers are noticing and complaining.
The issues are unfolding. If the auxiliary does not play his part
as the protagonist visualizes its essential quality, further role rever-
sals are used to guide the auxiliary toward a more accurate role
portrayal. If the protagonist tends to narrate to the director or
audience, the auxiliary should address him in-role:
AuxrLreny: You're talking as if I'm not even here! What's the big idea
of being so late this moming?!
If the protagonist becomes lost in intellectualization or confused
as to his feelings, there are some other techniques that may be
used:
o Accentuate the non-aerbal commttnications. Have the protago-
nist enact the scene without using actual words, but rather
with exaggerated vocal tone, inflection, rhythm, and accom-
panying facial expressions and physical gestures. This tech-
nique of using sounds without words ("blah-blah" or more
complex pronunciations of nonsense syllables) is also called
"gibberish." Through the action, the underlying emotion is
expressed more clearly.

The Actbn
7l
. Soliloquy. The protatonist is instructed to walk up and down
and talk to himself out loud, in order to clarify his feelings.
He can then reenter the interaction with the auxiliary in role.
. Double.If the protagonist has difficulty expressing his emo-
tions clearly, a double may be brought in, an auxiliary who,
as described in Chapter 3, will portray |oe's inner feelings
(Figure 5.7):
0
Drrucrott:
Jt're :
Mn. Joruus:
DougLp:
Jos:
Mn. Jorues:
DouaLr:
Figure 5.7
Mark, will y()u come in lrere. (Gives instructions for dou-
bling, then carries on with the scene.)
(continuing) Well, Sir, I think that wasn't our agreement.
Look, Joe, we have to run a business here.
Look, you bastard, here's how I really feel: #@'2,$!! (Figure
s.8)
(nodcling) Yeah! Ycru can't push me around like this!
Now hold on there!
It's about time someone was frank with you! When you
make an agreement-
Yeah, you have k'r stand by what you say!
Joc. Ma* is qoinato ba
uour doubb qr",f stA u;lvt
qou naU nalla be, fu.llirug
but an nof apresin0.
Jou:

72
Acting-In
a0
0
Figure 5.8
From this point, the interaction can be continued, or replayed, or
the scene shifted and a related interaction portrayed. If Joe has
problems with authority, many other encounters with authority
figures can be explored, always moving to more central emotional
issues.
MOVING FROM PERIPHERAL TO CENTRAL
In general, people cannot tease out the essential elements in a com-
plex welter of emotions. Layers of self-justifications and self-
reproach, explanations and excuses to others, difficulty in differ-
entiating between the actual circumstances and one's beliefs or
emotional reactions to events, and similar dynamics make it
impossible to develop a clear insight into the basic issues involved.
Yet there is an act hunger to express and explore personally mean-
ingful experience. Thus, it's all right to begin with some superficial
event, even one which the director may feel is peripheral to more
"core" conflicts.
h,bll srr..

The Action
73
Some therapists may see presentations of such peripheral issues
as avoidance, a kind of resistance, but in fact even these enact-
ments can serve as sources of ideas fostering the warming-up
process. Furthermore, it is an act of respect and wisdom to consid-
er that the protagonist's unconscious may be trying to symbolical-
ly help rather than hinder. In other words, good directors go along
with their protagonists rather than fight them.
For example, if the protagonist has difficulty in dealing with an
emotionally loaded conflict with his mother, he may be helped to
enact a similar situation with a saleslady. Another technique is to
have the protagonist play the role of his own brother or sister, and
to enact with his mother from that position. Marguerite Parrish
(1953) wrote about the following two useful techniques:
The substitute role technique is frequently used and is helpful
when working with protagonists who tend to be suspicious and
resist portraying themselves on the stage. This technique was suc-
cessfully used with a middle-aged woman diagnosed as having
involutional melancholia with some paranoid traits. She was
unable to enact her own situations and so was asked to play the
role of her mother, who operated a boarding house. In this role she
was at ease and seemed to enjoy going on the stage. During the
third session the protagonist brought up the fact that one of her
roomers was promiscuous. This story was also her own story. As a
young girl her illegitimate pregnancy was followed by an abor-
tion, and as she approached middle life she worried about this
incident and felt sure her family would find out and would no
longer love her. Psychodrama gave this women an opportunity to
freely express her feelings about the incident, and the discussion of
the audience helped her to see that she had the love of her family
and would not necessarily lose it because of the past event.
In the symbolic distance technique the protagonist enacts a role
very different from his own role and is gradually led to portray his
own role. This technique is particularly valuable when working
with children. A young boy and girl from broken and inadequate
homes were treated in this way. Individual therapy had been help-
ful and outward behavior improved, but the children were afraid
to leave the security of the hospital, for they felt sure they could

74
Acting-In
not get along in a home situation. Because the problems of these
children were so alike, they were cast as brother and sister and
were treated together. Following the portrayals, the group dis-
cussed why the children acted differently in the various situations.
From these scenes the children finally came to realize that they
could get along in some types of family homes and expressed will-
ingness to accept a family care situation.
If the protagonist tends to speak in terms of abstractions, con-
cepts can be made concrete by symbolizing them as figures with
their own personalities: "They," "society," "other people," "the
establishment," and "young people" all can be portrayed by an
auxiliary. "This woman is the Establishment. Talk to her now." The
protagonist is directed to confront the auxiliary and eventually
role-reverse with her, all of which brings the protagonist's conflicts
into sharper focus.
FOCUSING ON THE NONVERBAL
One of the most useful approaches in clarifying the protagonist's
problem is the emphasis on explicitly portraying the nonverbal
communication involved, e.g. :
Ioe: (protagonist) But Sir, yolu said you would.
Dlnecton: Joe, step out of the scene. Mark (another group member),
replay that interaction, acting the exact way Joe behaves
(mirror technique).
The director asks Mark to shift out of the role of double and to
take the role of the mirror. (Note: Any person participating in the
enactment, except the director and protagonist, is designated by
the general term auxiliary.) Figure 5.9 illustrates the scene that
ensues:
Manx: ffiI1"" 
ego, whining dramatically) But Sir, you said you
Jor: Wow! Do I whine like that?
Dtnecron: (to group) Is Mark's presentation fair? (Group agrees.)
Well, Joe, with whom did you "whine" as a child?
for: To my father, when he. . .

The Action
75
s*p\oitfiinc
A,C,
as Boss
Arrxiliarrt
Eqo (AE'\
as Pt. -+
1/s
Di.,
MirrorTechniqre
Figure 5.9
Often what is said in an interaction (the content) is less impor-
tant than how it is said (the process). The dramatization of the
expression, posture, tone of voice, angle of the body, and gesture
all help bring out the factors that may have been the major deter-
minants of the other person's reaction.
Body postures and other elements of nonverbal behavior com-
municate not only to other people, but also serve to cue or rein-
force personal attitudinal systems. Thus, the stance and other cor-
relations of whining behavior tend to reinforce a disempowered
feeling and associated beliefs, while a provocative habit of posture
or expression may promote a non-self-reflective attitude of self-
righteousness.
Role reversal, observations from the audience, and the ampli-
fication of gesture, as well as the mirror technique, help the pro-
tagonist and group become more aware of the nature and impor-
tance of the nonverbal communication being portrayed in the
interaction.
Pt.

76
Acting-In
EXPLORING UNEXPRESSED EMOTIONS
Whether in psychotherapy or in a class on social problems, one of
the challenges of consciousness raising is helping people become
more self-aware. In this sense, psychodrama is a way of opera-
tionalizing Socrates' dictum, "Know thyself." That people are
complex and self-deceptive is the major finding of dynamic psy-
chology, whatever the particulars of the various schools of
thought. How then to reduce this self-deception, to increase the
awareness of the whole range of attitudes and ideas which may be
influencing the people in a problematic situation? A further chal-
lenge is to more finely discriminate the issues involving the spe-
cific underlying assumptions and beliefs which may operate
unconsciously in most people's life.
Psychodrama utilizes the integration of imagination and action
with more traditional, verbal forms of self-reflection. In psy-
chodrama, the realm of imagination is recognized as being a pow-
erful dimension. By shifting from a passively visualized fantasy to
a dimension in which events are concretized in enactment, this
approach opens a new context for reexperiencing and reworking
the meaning and emotional impact of experience.
Moreno believed that the realm in which imagination can be
made manifest, phenomenological reality, deserves to be recog-
nized as a definite category of existence. He named this ontologi-
cal dimension surplus reality (Moreno, 1955). The value of this con-
cept is that it validates as a dimension of being worthy of being
taken seriously and explored those experiences of events that not
only have occurred in the past, and may occur in the future, but
also events that never occur-+ven events that could never hap-
pen!-such as an encounter with an unborn child, speaking with a
relative who has died, replaying a scene so that one experiences
mastery instead of humiliation, or having a dialogue with one's
patron saint or guardian angel. Surplus reality scenes allow the
whole range of the vehicle of drama to be fully utilized in the ser-
vice of people discovering the deeper aspects of their own
thoughts and feelings.
ln the action of psychodrama, then, scenes are constructed
which bring forth the protagonist's hopes, fears, expectations,

The Action
A. E.
as Fathar
77
/.
oof
Pt.,,
Figure 5.10
unexpressed resentments, projections, internalizations, and iudg-
mental attitudes. Furthermore, the protagonist is helped to venti-
late these feelings and symbolically live through them. In the case
of the example being used in this chapter, Ioe's muted conversa-
tion with the boss is converted into an emotional confrontation
with the help of the expressive double.
As the scenes are changed to deal with other authority conflicts,
a variety of techniques can be used to intensify the expression of
feelings. Height may be used to exaggerate a dominance-submis-
sion gradient. For example, in a scene between )oe and his father,
the auxiliary playing the father may be directed to stand on a chair,
and even further, Joe could kneel or curl up on the floor to reflect
the feeling of "You're so big and I'm so small." On the other hand,
in another scene, the disadvantage can be shifted by having foe
deal with his feared father by standing on the chair, compensating
for the earlier sense of imbalance in status or Personal power
(Figure 5.10). Using the gradient of height is often helpful as an aid
in assertion training.
Manipulating other physical elements in the scene, such as
adding some patronizing head patting, proddinS, or even physical

78
Acting-In
pushing, can sometimes be a catalyst to a catharsis, but such activ-
ities must be applied with caution and experience. Protagonists
shouldn't be overloaded, but a degree of confrontation may evoke
a decision for self-empowerment and counter-confrontation.
Directors should avoid overemphasizing only the negative,
angry feelings which, in many cases, are mixed with a desire for a
more positive and caring relationship. This desire may evoke even
more vulnerability (and thus be repressed) than the anger. And for
some people, anger comes too easily; the psychodramatist's chal-
lenge lies in helping them to learn to modulate the anger.
MOVING WITH THE RESISTANCES
One major challenge of psychotherapy or psychodrama is of help-
ing the protagonist find a way to examine those inner feelings that
threaten his sense of mastery or self-esteem. He may employ a
wide range of resistances in order to avoid facing unpleasant expe-
riences. I find that if the director works with the resistances, she
can often find a way to gradually explore the deeper conflicts.
Moreno puts it this way: "We don't tear down the protagonist's
walls; rather, we simply try some of the handles on the many
doors, and see which one opens."
When resistances become apparent, there are several steps to be
taken. First, ground the protagonist in the purpose of the activity
and the safety of the group and its process. Second, validate the
hesitancy, help it find an explicit voice. Use doubling to further
give words to this tension. For example, Joe stands transfixed as he
begins to think about his father.
DouaLE: This is very hard for me. I'm not sure I want to talk about
this.
fou: Yes, I feel very tense. (The director thc'n has the opportuni-
ty to support Joe in his fear.)
Dtnecrcx: Being honest with someone so close is difficult. Here, in
psychodrama, we can face the challenge. It involves taking
a risk, but it won't be overwhelming.
If the resistance is being acted out through a subconscious habit
of becoming more elusive, make that avoidance more explicit,

Tlrc Actiort
79
exaggerate the avoidance maneuver. For examPle, a resistance
expressed in the tendency to explain may be portrayed openly by
the director's asking the protagonist to talk to the group, to
"explain" his position for one minute.
Reframing elusive phrases can remind protagonists of their own
power. For example, the statement "l can't seefi to" may be agreed
with, but subtly redefined by the double or the director as, "l
Tuon't." "l don't know" can be reshaped as "I don't want to think
about that." "Why do I have to do this?" can be restated as, "I don't
like doing this." "lt's no use" may be supported, but qualified with
a statement of the temporary nature of the present resistance.
"Right norul see no way out."
The point of going with the resistances is that through the
explicit portrayal of the defenses, the protagonist becomes more
fully aware that he is choosirrg to use a defense, that is, the portrayal
increases his awareness of his own responsibility for his behavior
and sense of mastery over his habitual behavior patterns. The
more a protagonist can allow himself, with the support of the
director, to say no, the sooner he begins to feel free to say yes when
he is ready.
With a protagonist who is becoming overly anxious while deal-
ing with a problem, it is often appropriate to allow him to move
away from the core conflict, to obtain some distance. The move
from peripheral issues toward central issues described earlier can
be temporarily reversed.
A major block in many protagonists is use of the defense mech-
anism of isolation of affect-they are not even aware that they are
feeling any emotion. The first step in dealing with this resistance is
to help the protagonist become aware of the experience of emotion
within himself. Only when he is moved toward an attempt to iden-
tify the quality of the feeling can he go on to explore the meaning
of his emotions. In dealing with sensitizing a protagonist to his
own feelings, the director focuses on (a) the protagonist's nonver-
bal communications and (b)his lrln.gcnT. These two "avenues to the
unconscious" bypass the most common forms of resistance: intel-
lectualization, vagueness, explanation, rationalization, abstraction,
and circumstantiali ty.

80
Acting-In
The protagonist's nonverbal communication is dramatized by
treating the parts of the protagonist as if they were active beings in
themselves. Areas of tension in the body, tightness of the voice,
gripping of the hands all can be enacted as a little encounter
between different parts of the self, for example:
Jor: (to his "father") Daddy, why don't you-
Drnrcron: Joe, what is your voice doing?
for: It's choked.
Dlnscron: Now become the part that's strangling the throat!
Ior: (as throat) I'm being squeezed and strangled!
Drnecron: Now become the part that's strangling the throat!
Joe: (as strangler, rasping) Shut up, you S.O.B., or you'll get us
all into trouble! (twists his hands in a wringing motion).
This approach, like dream work, is used in Gestalt therapy and
psychosynthesis. Working with dreams can be an important
approach for healing (Leutz, 1986; Nolte, Weistart, & Wyatt, l97Z).
This method, too, utilizes the power of metaphor generated by the
protagonist's unconscious symbolizing ability.
The use of the imagery is another avenue to the identification of
deeper feelings. The different figures in a nightmare, hallucination,
or a guided fantasy can interact using psychodramatic methods,
and this can often clarify the nature of the protagonist's internal
complexes, that is, the conglomerations of attitudes, images, and
emotions.
Dealing with a protagonist's resistances is the core of psy-
chotherapy or psychodrama. The art of the director is tested
nowhere more than in this task. This section of the chapter has
only indicated some of the avenues of approach to a challenge that
demands an individual response in each situation.
PRESENTING THE BASIC ATTITUDES
An important step in the psychodramatic exploration of a problem
is the explicit portrayal of the protagonist's attitudes and basic
assumptions about himself, others, and the nature of human rela-

The Action
8r
tionships. These attitudes are often phrased in terms of internal-
ized sentences, that start with "should" and "ought." Encouraging
the protagonist to make these statements explicit is necessary
because they represent the values of his superego.
Jor:
(soliloquizing on stage with his double) How could I hate
my father? You're not supposed to hate your father!
Right! I shouldn't hate him no matter what!
And anyway, I loue him! How could I hate him?
I can't love and hate at the same time!
Well, maybe I can.
Joe's Douale:
Jor:
Dounrs:
JoE:
Not only the protagonist's feelings are to be expressed, but also
the attitudes that forbid the feelings from being accepted as part of
his self-system. Some of these common attitudes include:
Men aren't supposed to cry.
I should be able to handle this myself.
Being emotional is a sign of weakness.
If I start crying I may never stop.
If I express my anger I'm afraid I might lose control
or kill someone.
If I try to love someone, that person should be happy.
If I'm not happy, it's because they don't really love me.
People should be able to resolve their conflicts.
I should have known this by now.
If I haven't lived up to my expectations, I must be a failure.
There are hundreds of such "internal commands." Many of
what I've called the "lies we live by," the clichds, popular over-
generalizations, and general attitudes are described and critiqued
in many self-help books (Gillett, 1992). These core beliefs were part
of what Adler referred to as "private logic" (Manaster & Corsini,
1982). They were made more explicit in the pioneering work of
Albert Ellis (1962) and the increasingly popular cognitive therapy

82
Acting-ln
approach. Knowing about them is as important for a psy-
chodramatist as for a physician to know about the different kinds
of infectious micro-organisms.
Another way to portray the different attitudes and complexes is
to split the protagonist into different "selves." For example, one
part might be the iudging, rule-pronouncing complex, while the
other part is the rebellious, or passive-aggressive, sulking self. This
analysis is similar to Fritz Perls' (1969) concept of top-dog versus
underdog, or Eric Berne's terminology of parent, adult, and child
(Naar, 1977).
EXPLORING THE CORE CONFLICTS
The problem originally presented is often not at the root of the pro-
tagonist's emotional concerns. Basic attitudes have been estab-
lished in earlier life, and it is the relationships of that period that
are the next to be enacted. Sometimes what is indicated is not a
movement from the present to the past, but from a relatively
superficial to a more personal conflict, such as a sexual problem
with a spouse or a struggle between different needs within the pro-
tagonist himself.
As these core relationships are portrayed, it may seem obvious
to the director or the group that the protagonist is distorting the
feelings of the other persons in his life. The director should be in
no hurry to correct these distortions. First, the protagonist must
present the situation as he experiences it: This is his truth. He must
experience being listened to. Only then does he become more
receptive to exploring the possibility that the situation might have
other points of view.
In our example of Joe, the director may explore scenes in which
Joe wanted to be accepted by a father who had unrealistically high
expectations of him. |oe's fantasies can be portrayed in scenes in
which he is abandoned, rejected, or judged as inadequate by his
father. Exaggerating the physical relationships may help in clarify-
ing the protagonist's experience of significant events (Figure 5.11).
foe role-reverses and portrays his own conception of his father's
behavior. Indeed, Joe's portrayal of the father's judgment may be

s rcrnihds me
r"hm I hadtohtl nt1
Dod abart a hoknn
d^fun.
The Actiort
83
oc o oo
Figure 5.11
so harsh as to seem unrealistic to the audience, as if Joe is carica-
turizing what a "bad father" does. This is probably because he is
projecting onto his father the anger and guilt he feels within him-
self toward the weaknesses that only he himself secretly knows
and condemns. Thus, through role reversal the protagonist is
helped to portray the distortions of his interpersonal perceptions
by acting out what he believes others think (i.e., his own projec-
tions). This kind of approach can thus be an effective form of diag-
nosis of the protagonist's psychodynamics.
ACT HUNGER
Directors should not be impatient to have their protagonists "be
realistic," because this demand denies them the experience of hav-
ing their psychological truth validated. One of the implications of
the major development of "self-psychology" in psychoanalysis in
the 1980s was the recognition of people's need for empathic reso-
nance. It's as if the "inner child" cannot listen until it first feels
really listened to, and it can't have that experience unless it's

84
Acting-In
allowed to fully express itself. People need to hear themselves
think and feel, and this is aided by having other people around
who validate this process.
One of Moreno's more perceptive insights is that people need
even more than mere self-expression. They need-at least symbol-
ically-to experience doing things that fulfill their needs, not just
to talk about them. People who work with children know this, and
we should not presume that this need is lost in the process of nor-
mal development. Moreno used the term acl hunger to describe the
drive toward a fulfillment of the desires and impulses at the core
of the self. The director should help the protagonist achieve a sym-
bolic fulfillment of his act hunger, because it, too is a fundamental
part of the protagonist's psychological truth.
In the example of the enactment we have been using, the pro-
tagonist, Joe, first presents his father in the most caricatured form.
It is not time to explore who the father "really" was through role
reversal-that time may come later. First, Joe needs to overcome
his denial of his own vulnerability and discover his associated
rage, and this can only happen through a scene in which he final-
ly confronts his father; he may gain some insight into the rage he
has held toward his father by the director's helping him to portray
his anger in act fulfillment. As the protagonist portrays the anger,
themes of need and frustration, which are the bases of the anter,
should be interwoven.
lt is important that the director be aware of the psychothera-
peutic maxim, "Don't ventilate the hostility without the protago-
nist's also experiencing his dependency." That is to say, deal with
the protagonist's need for something that is frustrated by the sig-
nificant other. The catharsis of rage is usually a catharsis of long-
ing (Blatner, 1985a).
For example, as Joe confronts his rigid, demanding father,
whose unshakable coldness is dramatized and exaggerated by an
auxiliary ego, foe escalates his efforts to "get across to the old
man," without any success. Finally, he is ready for violence; the
director throws him a pillow and says, "There's your father -
what do you feel like doing to him?" |oe begins to beat the pillow,
curse at the father, and, with the help of the double and director,
express his pent up frustrations (see Figure 5.12).

The Action
85
Figure 5.12
JOE: You never cared about me! All you saw was what you
wanted! (He continues to strike the pillow, and is begin-
ning to cry.) You bastard! I wish you were dead! (Beats the
pillow furiously and cries.)
At this point, after a full expression, the director can move in
several directions. He may bring onto the stage an auxiliary to be
the "good father" who can "see |oe for what he really is." The
"reformed" auxiliary may hold Joe and talk to him (Sacks,1970).
Another very powerful technique is the denth scene.It can be
applied either to the death of the protagonist himself or as a vehi-
cle to review the feelings in relationship to a significant other per-
son (Siroka & Schloss, 1968). In the first form, the protagonist is
instructed to visualize his own death (the director may dim the
lights). The director might warm up to the situation by asking him
how he died, what it felt like, who is around him, and other relat-
ed questions. The questions and final statements to others and
(through role reversal) of others toward the "dead" protagonist
help clarify some of the emotional issues (Rowan, 1973). (This
method is useful for emphasizing the role of the choosing, respon-
sible self-the adult ego state, in transactional analysis terms.)
Finally, the death scene can move toward a "rebirth scene."
The death scene may be interwoven with iudgment scenes,
iudgment of others, or of the self (Sacks, 1965). The encounter with
St. Peter is often a useful technique. (St. Peter is the archetypal fig-
tlI
t,r
,ra
Q,
I

86
Acting-ln
ure guarding the gates of heaven who reviews the values and
meaning of the protagonist's life with him.) St. Peter can play the
role of the friendly and gentle interrogator. If the situation seems
more appropriate for a judgment by other people of the protago-
nist's life, members of the audience can be called in as jurors.
One variation of the death scene I like to use is the shift in St.
Peter's role from judge to philosopher. This usually surprises peo-
ple, for they are expecting St. Peter to be impressed by status and
"righteousness" issues, and upset by pecadilloes. Instead, St. Peter
simply asks: "How was it?" He does not respond to answers
reflecting the protagonist's status, that is, what the protagonist
"proved." Rather, he asks about the protagonist's values and
enjoyments: "Did you do what you had to do? Did you do it in
your own way? Did you 'create' along the lines of your natural
strengths, inclincations; or did you fulfill your life in a role that
was alien to your soul, because you were trying to live up to some-
one else's expectations?" Sometimes I follow this scene by giving
the protagonist an opportunity to enact the role he would choose
if he could be reborn in any kind of life he wanted.
A second major format of the death scene is more commonly
used, and involves the death of the significant other person. With
a protagonist who seems involved in continuously struggling to
change the other person, to "make him see," the director may stop
and say, "He's dead now." or, "You have just received a telegram
notifying you of his death. You rush back and stand at his bed-
side." Another variation is for the director to say to the protago-
nist, "You have five minutes to talk to him before he dies. Now is
the time to make your goodbyes, ask your final questions, express
your honest resentments and appreciations." For example:
Joe:
DrnECron:
Joe :
Joe:
FnrHpn:
(to "dying father") Y'know, Dad, I resented your judgment
of me as a child.
Reverse roles. (Joe moves over to the empty chair, becom-
ing the father)
(as father) Well, son, I wanted so much for you, but you've
done okay. (Change parts)
Dad, how do you feel about me now? (Change parts)
Joe, I'm kinda proud of you, I really am.

The Actiort
87
Jor: Dad, I love you, you know that?
AuxtLtnnv: (as father) I know, son (Joe weeps.)
Often the son makes his peace with his father in an atonement
(at-one-ment). "saying goodbye" is an important method also for
reinforcing the protagonist's sense of identity (Blatner, 1985b;
Kaminsky, 1981): "l'm going on. I don't need your suPPort any
longer. I can say goodbye. It hurts, but I can let go."
An important principle of healing is that the protagonist, with
the help of surplus reality, is enabled to create the desired experi-
ence. In the spirit of what the psychoanalyst Franz Alexander
called "an emotionally re-educative experience," imaginary scenes
function to bring into consciousness the person's needs that have
been repressed. The technique of the refonned auxiliary (Sacks, 1970)
symbolically gratifies that need with the validation of the director
and the group. An example of this is a scene in which the auxiliary,
having played a rejecting or withholding role in a previous enact-
ment, now is directed to play a more nurturing, positive role
(Greenberg-Edelstein, 1 986).
Another powerful technique that can sometimes follow a death-
and-rebirth scene is the "crib scene." This method is also useful in
allowing the protagonist to experience his own dependency needs.
The technique is often applied to the entire grouP, including the
protagonist. Doris Twitchell Allen (1956) describes it as follows:
"Today we can be babies-iust young infants in a crib.
And we can lie on the floor like babies. Pretend that you
are a baby." The director has the grouP lie on the floor, as
if they were babies in a crib. Then the director, in the role
of the nurturing mother, walks around from one to the
other, patting them and covering them with an imagi-
nary blanket:
"So the baby goes to sleep, warm and quiet. So the baby
gets heavy, and goes to sleep. And the mother comes and
loves the baby. Takes care of the baby. Covers the baby
and keeps it warm. Feeds the baby and gives it milk. Pats
the baby. Watches over the baby and loves the baby.
While the baby sleeps and sleeps." (This is usually
repeated several times during a 5-20-minute sleep.)
The sleep period is followed by the waking-up period:

88
Acting-In
"So the baby begins to wake up. Begins to move a little,
stretches a little. Opens its eyes. Begins to sit up. Feels
good, feels alert, feels huppy and content, sits up, gets
up, gets back in the chairs."
This is repeated as often as necessary for the group to
wake up, and finally ending with:
"Now as you sit back in your chairs you are adults again,
acting like adults. But for a while you were a baby and
the mother came and loved the baby and took care of the
baby." (pp.2|-25)
Often, in the discussion that follows, a number of group mem-
bers have been profoundly touched by the opportunity to experi-
ence regression within a context of unconditional nurturance.
Other reactions also make for a vigorous sharing.
Of course, the above-mentioned techniques can be applied in a
multiplicity of situations, all depending on the sensitivity of the
director.
Act hunger involves more than the expressions of anger and
dependency: The protagonist can gain important insights through
fulfilling the desire to boast, perform, demand attention, express
tenderness, dance, soar, hug, wrestle playfully, fall effortlessly, and
so forth. Scenes of act completion can involve death and rebirth,
risking and trusting.
Act completion validates the protagonist's emotional experi-
ences, thus reinforcing an integration of the previously rejected
and suppressed dimensions of the personality. As some protago-
nists remark after a catharsis, "It's OK for me to cry-it doesn't
prove I'm weak," or "Wow, I didn't know I had all that anger in
me-I thought if I would start to let it out I'd never stop, but I
Buess I have more self-control than I thought." Thus, the protago-
nist can accept the anger, dependence, and other negatively valued
emotions as part of himself and can redefine himself as one who,
as a vital living being, contains many different feelings (Blatner,
1985a; Kellerman, 1984).
Act completion further validates the sense of active choosing as
part of the self. There are many people who experience life as hap-
pening to them. They take a passive attitude and feel themselves
to be rather lifeless and empty inside. The catharsis that so often

The Actiort
89
accompanies the psychodramatic process represents an active tak-
ing into the conscious self all the different mixed feelings that had
heretofore been reiected and suppressed. Along with the feelings
of anger and yearning, there is a sense of "determination to go on,"
which becomes integrated into the progatonist's self-concept and
in turn adds a great deal of vitality to the sense of self.
It should further be noted that the excesses of emotion
expressed within a psychodramatic enactment are not likely to
lead to a complete loss of control. The presence of the director and
group and the expectation of staying within limits act as influences
to sustain a small amount of "observing ego" and "controlling
ego" in the protagonist's personality. It is rare that a protagonist
may begin to extend his destructiveness and stop "pulling his
punches"; and even then an experienced director can quickly
regain control.
SURPLUS REALITY AND ROLE REVERSAL
Following the portrayal of many of the protagonist's fantasies, atti-
tudes, and the fulfillment of act hunger, the protagonist has usual-
ly achieved a measure of insight into the nature of his own feel-
ings. To this is now added an exploration of some of the other emo-
tional dimensions of the situation.
For example, the adolescent who has explored some of his own
conflicts about taking responsibility (and his externalizations of
this conflict onto authority figures) may then portray his future.
This is another application of the previously mentioned principle
of surplus reality, using the ideas of an alternative or possible exis-
tence in which other events occur. lnthefuture projectiotr technique,
the adolescent can enact his life five years in the future (Yablonsky,
1954). The protagonist may discover that, as George Bernard Shaw
once said, "There is only one thing worse than not getting what
you want-and that is getting what you want!" Through future
projection the protagonist can approach a more realistic viewpoint,
and begin to portray scenes in which he can achieve some suc-
cesses based on his own work.

90
Acting-In
{athcr)
A.E.
Plar{S
Pt.
Figure 5.13
Another major form of utilizing surplus reality is to invite the
protagonist to put himself in the place of the others in his life (role
reversal). Through reversing roles (or changing parts) with the
important figures in his psychodrama, the protagonist can devel-
op some important practical and emotional insights into the oth-
ers' situations (Figure 5.13). Thus, role reversal becomes a major
technique for building the capacity for empathy with others
(Kellermann, 1994).
For example, in the psychodrama of Joe, the director may have
the protagonist explore some of the others' feelings after his
catharsis:
Dtnrcron: Now, be your father.
Joe: (as father) All right, I admit I did want you to be a football
player, 'cause I never had the chance.
DrnecroR: Changeparts.
Jor: (less whining) Well, Dad, that was your dream. I have my
own interests-l'm not going to make excuses for myself
anymore.
Later, the director may have Joe experience his employer's situ-
ation, and in the reversed role position Joe considers the possibili-
ty that Mr. Jones is susceptible to pressures from his other subor-
(?t.asI
0
0

The Actiott
9t
Pt
Sz
Zo
L-b
E
b
F6
tr!
Z,
Act - com pl etion.catlrarsis
ffrrrntotion of
t 0RKIN0 THELEH,
Rcwrsl
Clolutt
wilh
r?trt
$oto.otio..
bf pmblem
.L,,P
NIECNATON
TIME -+ 
PSYCHODRAMA CURVE
Figure 5.14
dinates, Joe's co-workers:
Jou: (as Boss) Look, Joe, I really don't like being in this posi-
tion-
Then Joe can be helped to creatively find some approaches that
might support his boss and yet help his own position, a way of
self-assertion that might include making tactful constructive sug-
gestions.
In addition to the use of role reversal and surplus reality, the
process of integration involves behavioral practice, role training,
sharing, discussion, and supportive closure. These dimensions and
techniques will be discussed in the next chapter.
THE FLOW OF INTENSITY
Progress through the warm up, the action, and the closure can fur-
ther be viewed in perspective by following a curve of intensity of
involvement and feeling over the time in the session (Fig. 5.14)

92
Acting-In
(Hollander, 1978). As the protagonist approaches an apex of feel-
ing, the resistances increase. He is always free to choose or refuse
to explore further. This is established at the outset. As resistances
grow, the director must continuously work mutually with the pro-
tagonist and decide whether to allow for some distance, take an
alternative route on another day, or attempt to work through the
resistances and reach the point of emotional openness. There may
be many "working sessions" in which the protagonist is not ready
to finish his exploration. There is no need for the director to feel
that he must produce a dramatic catharsis in each enactment. This
only leads to an undue "pushing" of the protagonist, instead of
allowing him to grow at his own pace.
Once the protagonist has reached a point of act completion,
catharsis, or otherwise has seemed to achieve his peak of emotion,
the director should allow him to move toward reduced emotional
intensity (i.e., integration and closure). The protagonist becomes
confused by attempting to follow one exploration with another.
Usually he has enough energy to deal with only one dimension of
his life experience in any one session.
SUMMARY
During the action phase the protagonist is helped toward the grad-
ual portrayal and exploration of the many dimensions of his life.
The director generally attends to the protagonist's progress
according to the following sequence:
1. Address first peripheral and then central issues.
2. Portray the spectrum of the protagonist's inner realities (for
which reason psychodrama is called "the theater of truth").
3. Explicitly present internal attitudes and feelings, and their
integration in "action insight."
4. Fulfill act hunger in act completion.
5. Allow a catharsis if it seems natural.

The Action
93
6. Begin exploration of the worlds of the significant others in
the protagonist's social network through role reversal.
7. Then begin to develop the integration of whatever insights
have been gained, which will be discussed in the next chapter.
REFERENCES / RECOMMENDED READINGS
Allen, D. T. (1966). Psychodrama in the crib. Group Psychtttherapy, 19(l-2),2T28.
Blatner, A. (1985a). The dynamics of catharsis. lournnl of Group Psychotherapy,
Psychodranm & Socionrctry, 37 (4), 157 -166.
Blatner, A. (1985b). The principles of grief work. In Creoting your liaing:
Applicntions ol psychotlrnnmlic nu'thotls in auervilnv hfe (pp.61-72). San Marcos,
TX: Author.
Ellis, A. (1962). Rr,nsort and u'l,oliott in psychotherap.y. New York: Lyle Stuart.
Gillett, R. (1992). Chnnge your nincl, changa your tuorlcl: A practicol gurdc. New York:
Fireside.
Goldman, E. E., and Morrison, D. S. (19&t). Psychotlronn: Ex1reriutce nnd yrrcess.
Phoenix, AZ: Eldemar.
Greenberg-Edelstein, R. (1985). Tln' nttrturatrca PhL'ntrntL'tlorl. Norwalk, CT:
Appleton-Cen tu ry-Cnrf ts.
Hollander, C. (1978). A proccssfrr psyclutdrnutn truining: Tln' Hollaudcr psycltttdranm
crrnrr'. Denver, CO: Snow Lion Press.
Kamirrsky, R. C. (1981). Saying good-by, an example of r.rsing a 'good-by' tech-
nique and concomitant psychodrama in the resolving of family grief .lwrml
of G ro t y Psycl o I harn p v, Psrlcl tod ra n m, 6t S.tc i (r,, td r !1, 34, I 00-1 I 1 .
Kellerman, P. F. (1984). The place of catharsis in psychodrama. lournnl of Groult
P sr1 c I ru t h c r n py, P sy c I wd r a n m €r S ttc i tu t t c t r y, 37 (l), 1 -13.
Kellermann, P.F. (1994). Role reversal in psychodrama. In P. Holmes, M. Karp, &
M. Watson (Eds.), Psyc/rodrann since Mrrrcno: lnnouotituts iu tltcory nnd prncticc.
London: Routledge.
Leutz, G. A. (1986.) The psychodramatic treatmcrrt of dreams. Grtntlt Annlysis.'19,
139-746.
Lippe, W A. (1992). Stanislavski's affective memory as a therapeutic tool. lournnl
tf Group Psychttlhun1ty, Psvchulronm [t Socitnntn1, 45(3),702-111.
Manaster, G.J., & Corsini, R. I. (1982). ltrditidual psyc/rolrr.grT: Thattrv ond ltracticc.
Itasca, IL: F. E. Peacmk.

94
Acting-ln
Moreno, J. L. (1965). Therapeutic vehicles and the concept of surplus reality. Group
P syc I ro t he rapy, 1 8, 211-21 6.
Naar, R. (1977). A psychodramatic intervention within a TA framework in indi-
viduals and group psychotherapy. Group Psychotherapy, Psychodranm €t
Socionet ry, 30, 127 -134.
Nolte, J., Weistart, J., & Wyatt, I. 0977). The psychodramatic production of
dreams. Group Psychotherapy, Psychod ra nn €+ Soc ionrctry, 30, 37 48.
Parrish, M. (1953). Psychodrama, description of application and reviews of tech-
nique. Grorrp Psychotherapy, 6(l-2), 74-77.
Perls, F. ('1969). Cestalt therapy uerbatim. Lafayette, CA: Real People Press.
Rowan, P.1., Jr. (1973). Psychodramatic treatment of death fantasies in adolescent
girls. Handbook of ltilernational Socionrctry, 7, 94-98.
Sacks, J. M. (1965). The judgment technique in psychodram a. Group Psychotherapy,
18(7-2),69-72.
Sacks, f. M. (1970). The reformed auxiliary ego technique: A psychodramatic
rekindling of hope. Group Psychothernpy, 23,71r*" 726.
Schulman, B. (1960). A psychodramatically oriented action technique in group
psychotherapy. Group Psychotheralty, 13(l-2), 34-38.
Siroka, R. & Schloss, G. (1968). The death scene in psychodrama. Group
P sy c ho t h e r a py, 21 (4), 202-205.
Yablonsky, L. ( 1 954). The fu tu re-proiection technique. G roup P sychotherapy, 7 (34),
303-305.

6
Integration: Behavioral Practice,
Sharing, and Closing
Following the warm-up and action portions, the third and last
phase of psychodramatic enactment is the time for integration. (In
previous editions, this phase was called uorking-through, relating it
to a psychoanalytic term which refers to similar dynamics.) It is
not enough to become aware of one's previously disowned feel-
ings, misunderstandings or denied attitudes which emerge with
the catharsis of abreaction; one must further discover some hope
that there are ways for effectively dealing with life's challenges.
The restoration of morale implicit in this task is called the catharsis
of integratiorr. Integration includes (a) developing some sense of
mastery over the problem, (b) receiving group support and (c)
preparing to re-engage the realistic challenges of the outside
world.
For some enactments, the major task is discovering and practic-
ing an effective behavioral response to problematic situations such
as asking for a raise, ensuring a more pleasant relationship with
parents during a forthcoming holiday visit, or renegotiating a rela-
tionship with a demanding friend.
In more therapeutically oriented psychodramas the goal is to
help the protagonist achieve some insight regarding the nonra-
tional feelings which affect his decisions. The kinds of deeper
explorations described in the previous chapter, including ventila-
tion, association, and catharsis, are often essential in this kind of
work. However, in settings which are not congenial to personal
self-disclosure, such as at school or work, psychodramatic meth-
95

96
Acting-In
ods modified to role playing can be most helpful, with goals limiF
ed to better understanding of the issues and thinking about more
practical alternatives. Such forms of role training or sociodramatic
role playing don't require the protagonist's exposing the particu-
lars of personal life. Indeed, directors in many settings need to
actively work to help the protagonists from allowing the spon-
taneity of the moment to render them vulnerable to shame or
blame. But, returning to therapy, forms of behaaioral practice often
have a place in the course of comprehensive treatment.
It is only partly true that once insight has been achieved then
creative energies are released sufficient to resolve problems. Shifts
in identity do offer new impetus to trying things a new way, but
there's still a considerable challenge in then exploring and consol-
idating those new strategies. So directors need to include in the
organization of their work, as suggested by the structure of the
psychodramatic spiral, opportunities to implement what has been
learned.
BEHAVIORAL PRACTICE
The function of behavioral practice is to experiment with a variety
of new behaviors. A "fail-safe" context, feedback regarding the
effectiveness of the trial behaviors, and opportunities for repeated
attempts until some degree of satisfaction is achieved are three
essential conditions to the protagonist's working through of his
problem. The behavioral practice may or may not be associated
with a deeper level of emotional exploration (Flowers & Booraem,
1e80).
The first step in behavioral practice sets up an enactment in the
same way as described in the warm-up and the first part of the
chapter on action. Once the protagonist and auxiliaries are
involved in the scene and the situation is presented, the director's
job is to help the protagonist get constructive feedback about his
performance.
Instead of immediately turning to the audience for criticism and
suggestions, which may be experienced as reproach by a protago-
nist who already feels "on the spot" in risking some exposure of

Integration
97
his inadequacy, it's best for the director to imply that the protago-
nist is capable of creativity given a little chance to explore with
some new "tools."
The first tool is the technique of. replay. This is nothing more than
the opportunity to try again, the essential component of practice
and rehearsal in almost any skill. Furthermore, after enacting the
problem, the spontaneity of the process often generates new ideas.
The protagonist may well have some idea about what wasn't
working well and how it might be played better. The director sim-
ply says, "Okay, try it again." Sometimes the opportunity to
rehearse is sufficient-and it's not something most people get a
chance to do often enough in life.
If the protagonist is uncertain how a behavioral response is less
than optimal, before getting outside feedback,let him try the tech-
nique of role reaersal. The protagonist plays the scene in the role of
the other person while the auxiliary shifts places and enacts the
scene in the same way the protagonist had performed the role. Of
course, this allows the protagonist to experience what it's like to be
"on the receiving end" of his previous approach. If he's gotten
some new ideas from this, he's allowed to go back to phase one
and try again.
If role reversal doesn't illuminate the problem, and the protago-
nist still feels unclear regarding what isn't working well in the
interaction, the director tries lhe ninor technique. The director
removes the protagonist from the scene and another auxiliary
comes in and plays his part. It's as if he's able to watch a video
playback of the situation without needing all the actual technolo-
gy and its constraints. From this outside, slightly more objective,
viewpoint (standing with the director, or sometimes sent off to
some more distant position in the room), the protagonist may get
clues about nonverbal style, context, or some other variable which
had been previously overlooked.
It's important to instruct the auxiliary who is playing the pro-
tagonist's role in the scene not to overact or caricaturize the pro-
tagonist. The director must work to create an atmosphere of
respect for the realistic nature of the challenge, and support for the
courage to take part in the self-critical process of finding a better
way of dealing with it. This is the scientific process, I sometimes

98
Acting-In
say, and in other ways keep a patter going that maintains a balance
of slight playfulness and sustained respect for the protagonist.
I also use Broup feedback to ensure that the auxiliary who is
mirroring the protagonist's behavior is fairly accurate. Sometimes
the auxiliary will not have picked up the essential element in why
an interaction isn't successful, o{, on the other hand, may exagger-
ate it. So the director should ask, "Has the auxiliary played it cor-
rectly?" If the group feels that the auxiliary is inaccurate, he or she
is either given another chance to replay the scene and correct the
behavior, or someone else can reenact the scene. When the protag-
onist indicates that he has some idea of how else he might behave,
sometimes involving only a rather subtle change in nonverbal
style, again he replays the scene.
Is there uncertainty about the range of possible behavioral
responses? Try the technique of. the worst way to do it. This should
be introduced in a somewhat playful way. I often use the metaphor
of computer program menus: There are many different alterna-
tives, and sometimes iust seeing everything on the menu can be a
source of ideas. So the scene is played in a way that would be total-
ly ridiculous or sure to backfire. Still, what sometimes happens is
that a certain role component gets energized which might not have
been operational previously. On occasion the protagonist simply
acts twice as assertive, expecting catastrophe, and the group
replies, "Now you're getting close!"
A variation of this is the technique of not me. The protagonist is
instructed to play the scene in a fashion entirely different from his
own typical style. Of course, we're subliminally suggesting an
activity of role expansion, akin to George Kelly's (1955) "personal
construct therapy." The protagonist may then decide himself or be
coached to play the scene in a manner that is silly, brutally frank,
very cautious and indirect, or confrontational. Experimenting with
these artificial manners gives the protagonist freedom to take a
risk (because he was told to act that way) and to perhaps find that
there are aspects of his new behavior that he might wish to inte-
grate into his own style. For example, in a group setting, two of the
participants in a nonverbal exercise interacted in a very constrict-
ed fashion. After some discussion, the two people were asked to
repeat the exercise in a way in which they would never behave in

Integration
99
their everyday lives. They proceeded to interact in a silly, awk-
ward, rough-and-tumble manner. Afterwards, they reported feel-
ing foolish, but admitted that they enjoyed themselves tremen-
dously. To their surprise, the group reinforced their risk taking by
responding that they were delighted with the two persons'sPon-
taneity.
In some situations, direct coaching is sometimes indicated. After
developing a sense of trust and alliance with her protagonist, the
director then can act as a theatrical director, suggesting specific
behaviors-a slightly raised voice, a more direct eye contact, less
of a smile, or some change in the phrasing of a sentence. Musical
conductors during rehearsal often coach the players in an orches-
tra this way, also.
This technique also has the benefit of introducing the group to
the power of nonverbal communications, and becomes an educa-
tional process for everyone. For example, the director might coach
the protagonist, "Try asserting yourself while you stand with your
pelvis tilted forward and your jaw thrust out"; or, "Answer your
mother with the palms of your hands facing downwards instead of
turned upwards in a pleading gesture." Attending to nonverbal
behavior is important not only because it significantly alters the
quality of the interpersonal communications, but shifts in posture
or expression also serve as internal cues which reinforce emotion-
al and cognitive attitudes (Walters, 1984).
If the protagonist still feels stumped, then we use the technique
of ntodeling, having someone else show how he or she would han-
dle the situation. Another person takes on what had been the pro-
tagonist's role in the scene while the protagonist and director
stand to the side and observe. Sometimes I have several Broup
members show their own variations. This practice neutralizes the
idea that there is only one "correct" way to play the scene and
invites the protagonist to pick and choose elements from several of
the approaches demonstrated. Again, the emphasis is on support-
ing the creativity of the protagonist.
The other value of this technique is that instead of group mem-
bers offering suggestions verbally-which might feel to the pro-
tagonist like uninformed advice mixed with a tone of reproach,
they prove their good will by taking on the stress of enactment,

100
Acting-In
entering the scene and struggling with the problem itself. The idea
is to maintain an optimal degree of group cohesion, sharing the
problem rather than implying that one person is foolish for not
knowing "the answer."
When the protagonist is again allowed to replay the scene with
some new understandings and variations, the director should also
emphasize the need for individualizing the response. One person's
style may be impossible for another person to emulate because of
differences in temperament. Talking about helping the protagonist
finding a style that feels right for his own temperament is another
way of offering support and respect.
It should be emphasized again that in psychodramatic enact-
ments in which the protagonist's self-understanding is the major
task, it is best to deal with issues of working through and behav-
ioral practice only after the protagonist has first fully ventilated
and has explored the meaning of his emotions. Moreno notes:
"Enactment comes first, retraining comes later. We must give [the
protagonistl the satisfaction of act completion first, before consid-
ering retraining for behavioral changes."
APPLICATIONS OF BEHAVIORAL PRACTICE
Psychodramatic methods are often applied in many contexts, and
one of the most common of these is the general area of skills train-
ing. Ironically, these active techniques have been incorporated into
a behavioral psychology framework and, judging by most of the
literature, few professionals know that these methods arose from
psychodrama! (Aside from the virtues of knowing the history of
one's profession, greater knowledge should lead to integration of
more of the other techniques and principles of psychodrama.)
In psychodrama as well as in many other areas of psychothera-
py, one of the more common themes has been that of assertion train-
ing. For many people, inhibition of assertiveness serves in a feed-
back process to reinforce victimization. Learning how to feel more
empowered is not generally taught in school, and assertion train-
ing since the late 1960s has become a major area of behavior ther-
apy in clinical psychology: How should one stand up to a domi-

Integration
r01
nating friend or resist peer pressures? How can one say "no" to a
persistent salesman? How does one ask for a date? What is the best
way to speak up at a meeting? (Powell, 1985). These methods can
be used to help shy, constricted people become more forceful,
which in turn develops their self-esteem.
Another common theme is a variation of assertion training:
ffict modulation.Many people don't know how to negotiate or pre-
sent their needs without escalating to an excess of emotionality.
Some enjoy the illusion of power that comes with this, while
others feel they've "lost control" and become guilt-ridden.
Disappointment, rejection, sentimentality, and other emotions can
be habitually overdone, and more modulated alternatives can be
practiced. In psychodrama, this behavioristic approach can be
integrated with attitudinal shifts, and cognitive therapy or ratio-
nal-emotive therapy techniques may be helpful aspects of this
process. In this way, psychodramatic methods can help those who
are histrionic or overly dramatic personalities to be less dramatic
and instead develop more matter-of-fact and appropriate styles of
relating.
A variation of this is the use of psychodramatic scenes as inter-
mediate techniques in desensitizing people to fears. Between very
imaginative relaxation processes, such as Wolpe's (1958) technique
of "reciprocal inhibition," and actual in vivo exposure-going on
that airplane or out into the mall-, one can also use role playing
techniques. Simply rehearsing an inevitable confrontation is most
helpful in reducing anxiety regarding situations such as "coming
out" to parents regarding one's homosexuality, telling a parent
that one is pregnant, asking a certain person for a date, or saying
"no" to a manipulative child or friend.
One of the earliest applications of psychodrama was in the
focused form called role training. This approach, now often called
skills training, has been applied especially in helping chronically
institutionalized psychiatric patients prepare for leaving the hos-
pital by practicing situations of seeking employment, returning
home, and even simple tasks such as opening a bank account or
going on an airplane. Parents-to-be can practice simulated bathing
of the baby; a teenager who has recently had a colostomy can pre-
pare for embarrassing questions from schoolmates; parents can

t02
Acting-In
explore different approaches to the management of behavior prob-
lems in their children (Sprafkin, Gershaw, & Goldstein, 1993).
A variant of applied behavioral practice is spontaneity training,
helping people to become more spontaneous and to rediscover
their capacity for playfulness and imaginativeness. Sometimes I
will help a protagonist integrate the previously disowned "inner
child" by fostering a context in which he can give himself permis-
sion to be playful, perhaps using some techniques derived from a
synthesis of creative drama and sociodrama (Blatner & Blatner,
1e88).
Behavioral experimentation is also facilitated by taking a role of
a fictional or mythical figure. This technique can sometimes pro-
vide enough role distance so that certain behaviors which might
not be part of one's everyday role repertoire-such as the triumph
and swagger of the hero, the wickedness of the caricaturized vil-
lain, the innocence of a newborn baby, or the seductiveness of a
temptress-may be tried.
Finally, behavioral practice can be used outside of therapy, not
just for helping fairly unskilled people develop some degree of
competence, but even for professional skills training, for helping
those who are well educated to develop more highly refined inter-
personal skills. Medical or mental health professionals can be
helped to acquire skills in interviewing, history taking, counseling,
or giving support through the method of role playing: What
should one say to a dying patient? How does one ask about sexu-
al issues in interviewing? What is the best response to an irritated
or dissatisfied customer? Some references regarding this are noted
at the end of Chapter 8.
Thus behavioral practice in its many forms can serve as an
invaluable aid in working through a problem. Trial behaviors are
explored in a fail-safe context, and support and reinforcements are
given to more appropriate responses.
SHARING
Once the protagonist has finished his enactment, he is in the
process of becoming gradually more reflective, less warmed- up,

lntegrelion
103
and is ready to receive some feedback. In the enactment, his phys-
ical involvement and spontaneity have rendered him very vulner-
able to the judgments of the others in the group-much more vul-
nerable than if he had used only his verbal defenses in a narrative
form. Instead of permitting a potentially humiliating "analysis,"
the director uses the psychodramatic technique of slmring. In shar-
ing, the director seeks feedback that puts a premium on support
and on the self-disclosure of the group members (Barbour,1.972,
1977;Pitzele, 1980).
The director and the protagonist sit down together to begin the
interaction with the group. I often leave an empty chair next to the
protagonist so that if someone in the group wants to come forward
to share on a more personal, one-to-one level in front of the group,
it is possible to do so. The spontaneous feelings of closeness or the
intuitive sense of the protagonist's needs determine how close
people are to sit and whether body touching is appropriate.
Psychodramas that have produced a catharsis or a portrayal of
a very moving situation sometimes close with hugging and shared
crying among the group members and the protagonist. Other
enactments in which the protagonist has made a "breakthrough"
using the media of playfulness may close with triumphal activity.
The primary guidelines for the director are based on the genuine
feelings of the people involved, rather than the applications of any
superficial technique.
I discourage the rittralistic practice of applause after a psy-
chodramatic enactment: I think it cheapens the whole process.
(This is to be differentiated from an allowable spontaneous burst
of joyous applause when something happens during an enactment
that evokes the group's enthusiasm. ) Once the protagonist is seat-
ed, the director explains sharing to the group:
"Now is the time for sharing. The protagonist [use his
name, e.9., "l<te"l has shared with you a very personal
part of his life; he has left himself vulnerable to your
comments. Ratlrer than give an 'analysis,' it would be
more appropriate for us to respond authentically and
subjectively. How has Joe's drama touched each of you?
What have you experienced that relates to foe's situa-
tion?"

t4aM
fdt
ulhen
a
l^nS
told mc".
104
Acting-ln
0
a
0o
Figure 5.1
At this point, several people usually express past or present con-
flicts in their own lives and share the mixed feelings that they too
have felt (Figure 6.1). The auxiliaries may also be invited to share
the reactions they experienced in role as the protagonist's father,
employer, spouse, or other auxiliary part as well as their own real
life feelings.
Some group members tend to express opinions rather than shar-
ing personal associations, for example, "I felt you were being real-
ly passive with your father and that this is probably due to your
relationship with your mother." (fust because a sentence begins
with "I feel" doesn't mean it is indeed a genuine feeling-it may
nevertheless be a disguised opinion, a pseudo-interpretation.) The
director should abruptly intervene and reiterate the instructions
about sharing: "This is not the time to talk about foe's problem.
How has his story touched your life?" If others try to talk about
their own feelings, but because of defensive habit, continue to say,
"You feel..." or "You want..." the director may gently remind them
to take responsibility for their own statements: "You mean, 'lfeel"'
Usually group members will respond quickly and proceed talking
about their own experiences in the first person.
If no one in the group initiates the sharing, it could be due to
several causes: (a) the group is not warmed-up enough, (b) group
cohesion is still weak and members are afraid to disclose them-
selves, (c) the protagonist's enactment was too abstract or the situ-

Integration
105
ation too foreign to the group, (d) the protagonist's position was
very different from Broup norms or values, or (e) the group is
angry with the protagonist or director. Each situation must be
dealt with creatively by the director.
At least a minute of waiting for sharing to begin may be appro-
priate. In some more reticent cultures, it often takes a while before
someone "breaks the ice." When I worked with a fapanese group,
there seemed to be a rather awkward moment before the sharing
began, but once it started, sharing was extensive and moving-
and I learned that, perhaps because of the acculturation towards
social sensitivity, this phase for them was particularly important
and a good deal of time needed to be allocated to allow it to flow
most spontaneously to its own conclusion.
One approach to resistance in the group's sharing is for the
director to simply repeat that the protagonist has given each of
them a "gift," and that it would be unfair for the group not to share
in return. In another approach, the director says, "Look around at
the group... look at their eyes ...they are telling you their feelings."
Or, she can ask the protagonist, "Who do you think is touched by
your story?"
Someiimes the group may have a need to share not only with
the protagonist, but also with the role played by one of the auxil-
iary egos-such as the protagonist's father: "l really understood
what you had to go through, Mr. Smith, because I, too, have a son
like Joe (the protagonist), and I felt the same way..." The director
asks the group to share with the significant other person in the pro-
tagonist's life after the group shares with the protagonist. This
technique can keep the end of the session in action and may allow
for a more complete closure.
Most of the time, sharing proceeds smoothly. Often the sharing
by one of the other group members may lead directly into another
psychodrama. For example, a member might share, weeping, "My
mother never understood me either; and I reiected her ...and now
she's dead!" The group member who shared now becomes the pro-
tagonist and is helped to enter his own enactment (he is already
warmed up!). Indeed, a long session may have several psychodra-
mas, each triggered by the other.

r06
Acting-ln
It is very important to both group members and the protagonist
that at least 15 minutes or more be allotted for sharing. Not only
does this provide mutual support, but misunderstandings that
may have arisen during the session can then be clarified through
the opportunity for questions and feedback.l made a mistake early
in my work in connection with this issue. In a role-playing session
with nursery school teachers, the problem arose as to how to set up
a conference with the resistant mother of an aggressive child.
Several teachers in turn took the role of the one who was trying to
coax, cajole, or firmly instruct the "mother" (played by one of the
group members) to make an appointment. Finally, one of the
teachers, Mary, risked being "too hard" and set down an ultima-
tum: "Either you come in by a specified date or your child must
leave the school." The teacher playing the mother became furious,
and vigorously tongue-lashed Mary for this "unreasonable" posi-
tion. The group broke into a burst of spontaneous applause. After
the role playing was over, there was no time left for sharing.
In the next session, a week later, Mary reported having experi-
enced anxiety during the interval: She felt the group rejected her
because of her stand. She felt that the group's applause at the
angry response of the other teacher (as mother) was evidence of
rejection. The group was surprised, and vociferously reassured
Mary that the applause was not against her; indeed, they felt her
stance was most effective. The applause was for the other teacher's
burst of spontaneous, "angry" emotion! The group did not agree
with the "mother," but they were delighted with the other
teacher's open expression of affect-so hungry were they for some
active, emotional interchange. Although Mary was pleased to
receive this reassurance, she had still undergone a week of unnec-
essary worry. As director, I should have paced myself so that the
sharing and feedback occurred right after the enactment.
Thus, the sharing period provides an opportunity for all of the
participants in a psychodrama to ventilate their feelings. The
group members need this as much as the protagonist does. The
catharsis in the drama may then spread, be reexperienced, and
subside as the group realizes its common bond of human feelings.

Integ,ration
l07
CLOSING
At the end of a group session, the director may wish to finish with
a variety of approaches. The length of the session, the degree of
cohesion and self-disclosure achieved, and the task of the group
are all variables to be considered. Often a period of discussion may
follow the sharing, which could lead to a further winding down of
the level of tension. Some of the components of closing to be con-
sidered include the following:
o "RecntrA." How will the group members adapt what they
have learned to their everyday lives? This is especially
important after long or otherwise intensive sessions.
. Sunmrnrizirtg. ln more task-oriented groups, where personal
involvement has been limited, a summary of what has gone
on and discussion of implications and plans may be in order.
. Plnnning tltc naxt sr,ssion. In ongoing therapy groups, future
agendas may be discussed. Perhaps one of the group specif-
ically volunteers to be a protagonist, or a certain theme is
agreed upon.
. Suptport.lf one protagonist has become particularly vulnera-
ble due to his participation and risk taking in an enactment
or confrontation, and the director feels he may need some
additional support, she may wish to use a specific ego-build-
ing technique. (For example, all of the members in the group
tell the protagonist something they like about him.)
. Unfittishad busirrcss. There may yet be a sense of unspoken
feelings between Broup members (including the director).
One technique is called rasatttnrctrts nnd nppreciations: "Before
we close, we can ventilate any unfinished business. It's not
always necessary to work these things out, but it's important
that the unspoken feelings be expressed openly before we
end." The group is drawn into a circle. "You may want to
share directly the resentments and/or appreciations you feel
for each other. Now is the time to do so." Then the group
members speak up as they feel the need: "Nancy, I resent the

108
Acting-ln
way you judged me"; "Bill, I appreciate your support, and
resent your pity"; and so forth. Ideally, this should be
reserved for ongoing groups in which there will be opportu-
nities to follow up on the issues raised using this technique.
o Closing rituals. There are a variety of closing techniques such
as simply holding hands in a circle, or leading the group in
a guided fantasy. (Weiner & Sacks, 7969).
o Separation. The degree of intimacy in groups that have had
much emotional exchange is often such a new experience to
the group members that they resist breaking the group cohe-
sion. Ritualizing the separation experience can often be use-
ful. For examaple, a group may form a close circle and each
person looks at the others and says "goodbye" to every other
person in the group. ([t is not necessary to do this one at a
time; all can do it simultaneously.) Further techniques are
discussed by Treadwell, Stein & Kumar (1990).
SUMMARY
This chapter has discussed the activities of the third and last phase
of the psychodramatic enactment, integration. The *oiki.,g
through of the problem using behavioral practice may either be i
way of following up an insight gained in the preceding enactment
or may itself dominate the session. Following the integrative
enactment, the director moves into the sharing phase, and finally
closes, using a variety of techniques.
REFERENCES / RECOMMENDED READINGS
Barbour, A. (19721. The self disclosure aspect of the psychodrama sharing session.
G ro u p P sy cl rc t hera 1ry turtl P sy c hod r a rua, 25, 1 32- I 38.
Barbour, A. 09n1. Variations on psychodramatic sharing. Group psychotherapy,
Psychodrann €t Socionret ry, 30, 722-126.
Blatner, A., & Blatner, A. (1988). The ort of play: An arlult's guide to reclniming inng-
ination and spontaneity. New York: Human Sciences Press.

lntegrution 
109
Feinberg, H. (1959). The ego building technique. Group Psycltothernpy 12(34),
230-235.
Flowers, J. V. & Booraem, C. D. (1980). Simulation and role playing methods. In F.
H. Kanfer & A. P. Goldstein, Helping people clmngc: A textbook of nrcthods (2nd
ed.). Elmsford, NY: Pergamon.
Goldfield, M. (1968). Use of TV videotape to enhance the value of psychodrama.
A n rcr i c o n I o u r no I of P sy ch i o t ry, 1 2 5(5), 690-692.
Kellerman, P. F. (1988). Closure in psychodrama. lournol of Group Psychotherapy,
Psychodranm €s Socionu:t ry, 41(l), 2l-29.
Kelly, G. A. (1955). Psychology of lrL'tso,tll cottslrttcls. New York: Norton.
Pitzele, M. S. (1980). Moreno's chorus: The audience in psychodrama. Grott;r
Psychtttherapy, Psychodranm I Socionrct ry, 33, 139-14'1.
Powell, M. F. (1985). A program of life-skills training through interdisciplinary
group processes. Journol of Grttu1r Psychothtrnpy, Psychotlronm I Socittuetry,
38(1),23-34.
Sprafkin, R. P., Gershaw N. I., & Goldstein, A. P. (1993). Social skills for nrcntol
Ircoltlt: A structured lt'aruing opproach. Boston: AIlyn & Bacon.
Speros, T. (1972). The final empty chair. Grtnry Psvchothrrnlty, 25(l-2r,32-33.
Sttrrm, I. E. (1965). The behavioristic aspects of psychodrama. Crott;t
P s!rc I u'tt hL' ro p v, 1 8(1 -21, 50-{14.
Treadwell, T. W, Stein, S., & Kumar V. K. (1990). A survey of psychodramatic
actirrn and closure techniques. lournol of Croup Psyclntln'rnpy, Psrlcltodronn {t
Soc ionnt ry, 4.1(3), 1 02-1 I 5.
Walters, R. P. (1984). Nonverbal communication itr grottp cottnseling. ln G. M.
Gazda (Ed.), Grttult t'ttuttstling: A deodopnrnlnl npproaclt (pp203-233). Boston:
Allyn & Bacon.
Weiner, H. & Sacks, ,. M. (1969). Warm-up and sum-up. Crtutp Psychtttln'rn141,
22(t-21,85-102.
Wolpe, J. (1958). Psyclntln'rayy hy rcciprocol inhiltititttt. Stanftrrd, CA: Stanford
Univcrsity Press.

7
Principles and Pitfalls
Psychodrama is a powerful methodology, and it can be misused. In
other chapters I have likened it to surgery or the use of electric
power tools in carpentry, and one of the implications of the latter
metaphor is that knowledge of the craft must be greater than mere-
ly knowing how to use the tools. Even the best tools cannot sub-
stitute for basic good judgment. Judgment must be applied not
only to the achievement of the task, but also to the safety of all con-
cerned, which requires also a recognition that if used carelessly, the
tools themselves can be dangerous.
Moreno (1957) was aware of the ethical aspects of leading psy-
chodrama and promulgated one of the first codes of ethics for group
therapists. Psychodramatists, whether they engage in therapy or
work in a non-clinical context, must become increasingly alert to the
problems of clarity, boundaries, and ethics in theii professional
roles. our culture has begun to critique a wider range bf authority
roles, and even the role of physician and healer has been shown to
be capable of corruption under the guise of benign intention.
Distortions of the helping relationship arise both from clients who
may unrealistically idealize their helpers and from helpers who may
deceive themselves about the nature of their own explrtise.
This is why the use of psychodramatic methods, particularly ',clas-
sical" psychodrama, requires a fair amount of training. Yet on the
whole, the process can be made fairly safe if two generalcategories of
principles are maintained: (a) the humility of the director; and (b) the
promotion of mutuality with the protagonist and the group. But it is
not enough to merely affirm ideals; in the spirit of Moreno's commit-
ment to methodology, these two general principles may be opera-
tionalized through the use of a number of specific techniques.
ll0

Principles and PitfitI l:;
ill
HUMILITY
An operational definition of humility is keeping in mind the pos-
sibility-nay, the inevitability--of being wrong some of the time.
So instead of being defensive, the psychodramatist remains vigi-
lant against her own errors.
One barrier to this healthy attitude-an attitude held by the
most successful executives-is a director or therapist's expectation
of knowing everything important about the protagonist or client.
In fact, this is virtually impossible. It reflects a mechanistic model,
more appropriate for dealing with simple systems. But humans are
highly complex, operating at many levels, and shifting in their
minds among many different frames of reference. Thus, working
with people requires a "systems-oriented" model in which the
actions of the helper are guided by the reactions of the individual
receiving help in an ongoing fashion.
Thus the director must become comfortable with a state of ambi-
guity, and be quite open and willing to accept suggestions. For
example, in the course of directing a drama the director might turn
to the group and ask, "Does this seem to be the right direction?" or
"Might I be missing something here?" An evident comfort in ask-
ing for help creates a model of confidence in a method while relin-
quishing any arrogant attachment to a particular hypothesis. The
psychodramatic method is based, after all, on experimenting with
ways to facilitate the natural act hunger of the protagonist. The
director then abandons the illusion of being right, and instead
affirms with humility what Dreikurs called "the courage to be
imperfect" (Terner & Pew, 1,978).
The director can afford to be humble while serving a methodol-
ogy which relies not so much on the cleverness of the director but
rather on the creativity of the protagonist. In allowing all parts of
this system to communicate among themselves, wisdom tends to
follow. The variety of dramatic devices, possible scenes, and alter-
native techniques is rich enough to offer some kind of help to even
the most blocked protagonist.
As mentioned in the section on dealing with resistances in the
chapter on action (Chapter 5), the director need not become over-
ly forceful in attempting to generate a breakthrough. Do not be

tt2
Acting-In
deceived by the suffix "drama" in the name of this method:
Psychodrama can be gentle, subtle, and seemingly nondramatic, in
the sense of lacking in histrionics. While there are clients and situ-
ations which certainly benefit from a profound emotional cathar-
sis, in other situations the appropriate enactments may call for ton-
ing down emotionality and encouragement of a more matter-of-
fact manner.
MUTUALITY
The principle of mutuality is an implementation of the more basic
principle of humility and refers to the idea that the director must
be guided by feedback from the protagonist. When the director
makes a suggestion that the protagonist feels is unhelpful, the pro-
tagonist must be free to express his feeling, and must know that
the director will openly listen to the obiection and be willing to
change. The idea that the therapist knows what's best for the client
must be challenged, because work within highly complex systems
requires an ongoing interactive process-and the human mind is
indeed highly complex. Because each individual has a unique set
of abilities, temperament, past experiences and goals, help must be
indiaidualized. Furthermore, these variables change, sometimes
moment to moment. The director must explicitly build into the
psychodramatic and group process ways not only to work with the
problem, but also ways to work with the helper. Because there are
so many variables of individuality, helpers can never know exact-
ly how to be most effective; the person being helped must learn
first of all to give ongoing feedback to the helper regarding timing,
the type of help, even the choice of words.
The first technique, then, of mutuality is role training the pro-
tagonist to correct not only the role playing of auxiliaries, but also
to correct the coaching of the director! With clients who are overly
deferential, I sometimes make this a playful process, caricaturing
an erroneous behavior of a rather innocuous sort, and having the
protagonist practice correcting me in front of the group. In turn, I
reinforce this assertive behavior by responding appreciatively.
(People are not merely afraid of the group leader, they are also pro-

Principles and Pitfalls
tective of and afraid for the group leader, lest the leader be "hurt"
by the group's challenges.) The protagonist and the grouP then see
that the director won't become defensive, manipulative, or bel-
ligerent, but rather is comfortable with a clear, courteous, yet firm
feedback process.
As the psychodrama continues, the director can periodically
pause and ask group members to assess the process, while main-
taining a balance between humility and confidence. An excessive-
ly deferential or hesitant manner can be as off-putting as an arro-
gant attitude.
A third technique is to make explicit the issue of therapist-client
power. For example, the director may comment on the group
norms in her introductory remarks:
"During this group session, each of you will be responsi-
ble for choosing your own directions. You may proceed
at your own pace. You will benefit from these sessions in
direct proportion to your own active participation and
the extent to which you are willing to take some risks.
My role is to help you clarify your goals and feelings. I
can show you some methods which you may find help-
ful in redefining your experiences more creatively. More
importantly, in this group I will attempt to develop an
atmosphere in which you will feel ready to explore."
Group procedures are emotionally loaded, capable of shaming
and frightening participants, whether they are in the context of
psychotherapy, education, team building or Personal growth. They
have a potential for "second wounding" patients who have been
hurt or traumatized, or who have felt overwhelmed or discounted
in earlier experiences with groups or so-called helpers. The emer-
gence of an increased awareness regarding the prevalence of the
dynamics of abuse, addiction, and the capacity for allowing abuse
to happen all require an increased level of meticulousness in keep-
ing patients and groups empowered.
Many of these principles apply to anyone who moves into an
authoritative or helping role, whether or not psychodramatic
methods are being used. I find most therapeutic problems arise not
il3

tt4
Acting-In
from a misuse of a technique, but rather from forgetting (or not
understanding) the deeper principles of group leadership.
A fourth and related technique for promoting a more conscious
approach to the helping situation is for the director to explicitly
comment on the issues of authority versus authoritarianism and
the irrational elements attending this "power gradient." The audi-
ence can be invited to actively support each other in challenging
the director regarding even the slightest breach of full respect and
mutual interchange.
A fifth technique for a director to maintain an optimal degree of
mutuality in the helping relationship is to pause at intervals and
explain the rationale for how one is proceeding. Then the director
reengages the protagonist and/or the group, reaffirming or adiust-
ing the implicit contract regarding what shall be addressed and
how the process will be pursued. (This emphasis on the "contract"
was a major contribution of Eric Berne, the inventor of
Transactional Analysis.) An objection to this technique is that it
would break the flow or momentum of the action. Certain phases
of the process do need to unfold spontaneously. But breaking out
of the slightly entrancing process, becoming regrounded, and
questioning the proceedings might, at other times, be both sponta-
neous and appropriate. The point is to optimize the empowerment
of the clients by developing their capacity to reflect on the helping
process as well as their own issues.
ACTION versus AWKWARDNESS
Although the director of a psychodramatic enactment should gen-
erally strive to keep the action going, she must nevertheless avoid
the pitfall of trying too hard to attain what seems like technical vir-
tuosity. Allowing for some awkwardness at times is preferable to
attempts at cleverness. While a truly polished enactment can result
from the use of scripts and rehearsals, there tends to be a corre-
sponding loss of spontaneity, the vitality of which is essential to
much of the effectiveness of psychodrama. Spontaneity can really
flow with remarkable smoothness at times, but it can easily shift
into moments of awkwardness (2. Moreno, 7969, p.236).

Principle.r and Pitfulls
115
Awkward occasions serve to shift the protagonist into the meta-
role of the co-investigator. I sometimes use those moments of
becoming blocked to act as if I were a scientist in a laboratory:
"Hmm,let's see what we have going on here." This shift in role can
be used to clarify the contract, affirm the treatment alliance, get
reassurance from the group, and reflect on what has transpired so
far. Openness to breaks in the flow also model the director's com-
fort with the basic method rather than promote the illusion that a
magic spell must be maintained.
One aspect of both humility and mutuality is a determination to
demystify the process, and thereby reduce the mystique of the
director. There is sufficient power and novelty in psychodrama
itself that no further efforts are needed to increase the authority of
the group leader. If anything efforts should be made at reducing
the charisma of the director and returning the power to the pro-
tagonist and the group.
One can be humble with an aura of gentle confidence. Too much
deference, as mentioned, is distracting. People begin to feel sorry
for the director and by extension, they begin to question the value
of the method itself. So the director need not be self-consciously
hesitant with statements such as, "Why don't you..," "How would
you feel about ..," or "Would you like to...." It is better to be gently
positive. Once the freedom to say "no" has been clearly estab-
lished, the director can speak with assurance: "Okay, be your
father..," "Now, show us..." "ln this next scene we'll..," or "Change
parts."
Another ethical principle states that the leader remind protago-
nists and groups that the procedure is at all times voluntary
because creativity requires spontaneity and spontaneity requires
freedom. The freedom to say "y"t" is predicated on the freedom to
say "no." So if protagonists indicate that they feel "finished" in the
course of an exploration, or if someone is reluctant to enter the pro-
tagonist role, this preference must be honored. Any coercive or
manipulative behavior on the director's part, or even manipula-
tions of the group that are permitted by the director will result in
a loss of trust in the group (Sandron, 1973).

l16
Acting-In
PATHOLOG ICAL SPONTANEITY
The principle of spontaneity can also be misused. It must be dif-
ferentiated from mere impulsivity (Blatner, 1988.) Group leaders
often deal with countertransference reactions to a protagonist by
getting angry at him, and then rationalize this behavior by calling
it "being authentic," "modeling anger," "confrontation," or "feed-
back." Exhibiting any and all impulses is not the purpose of devel-
oping spontaneity. When grossly misused, this kind of expressive-
ness could be called pathological spontaneity.
The attacking behavior described above sometimes represents a
form of acting-out of the director's own countertransference (i.e.,
the therapist's emotional reaction to her patient). Another form of
countertransference behavior is the inappropriate use of undue
physical contact, sexual advances, or sarcasm. The motivating
forces for these types of behavior are manifold, and the director is
cautioned to continuously assess her own behavior to prevent this
most prevalent pitfall for all those in the helping role (Shaffer,
rees).
One of the most common sources of pathological spontaneity
arises from the director's need to prove that she is professionally
competent by obtaining "results." She thus becomes impatient
with the reality that personal growth is a very gradual process,
fraught with resistances, defenses, and flagging motivation. If the
director feels personally threatened, whether consciously or
unconsciously, by her protagonist's slow progress or reactions, she
is likely to engage in a variety of maneuvers: subtly provoking
guilt, generally barraging the protagonist with words in an effort
to get a point across, and other confrontations. If the director is not
aware of her counter transference reactions, she may fall into the
maior error of pushing and coercing her clients, or allowing other
Broup members to act out her own needs (Kane, 1992). Coercion
accounts for most of the worst abuses that occur in therapeutic
groups and similar settings. A less obvious abuse occurs through a
leader's passivity. It is not helpful for a group leader to indulge in
excessively nondirective behavior. Important countertransference
issues are apparent in this leadership stance also. Many of these

Principles and Pitfalls
tl7
reactions happen to even the most experienced therapists, but one
must learn to watch out for them and not inflict them on the group.
REGARDING CONFRONTATION
Psychodrama draws on three sources of healing: The clients' own
act hunger, the support of the group, and the novelty and creative
insights offered by the use of the psychodramatic methods them-
selves. However, clients can become too impatient and even
masochistic in order to achieve a fantasized breakthrough.A grouP
can unconsciously collude in a desire for a quick and dramatic
catharsis and push too hard. With the goal overshadowing the
process, the methods can be applied insistently without a full
respect for the natural flow of learning.
It is essential to trust the method, and to beware of feeling a
need to "ir.p in" with clever interpretations and confrontations.
Instead, warm-up techniques should be aimed at establishing a
norm of mutual trust and respect. An approach that suggests a
confrontational attitude only tends to increase the defensiveness of
everyone in the group.
Not only should the director avoid confrontational attacks, but
she should also limit the tendency of group members to subtly
attack each other. The practice of giving feedback when it is not
asked for is often a form of externalization or proiection on the part
of the person making the interpretation. The director may identify
the source of such thinly veiled attacks by gently saying to the
speaker, "You seem genuinely concerned about X's behavior.
Would you care to explore what it is about his behavior that affects
you so deeply?"
PROFESSIONAL CONSIDERATIONS
The director should be aware of the problems in leading different
kinds of groups, so becoming well grounded in the principles of
group psychotherapy is important. The principles of working with
hospitalized psychiatric patients are quite different from those
involved in leading a personal development group for relatively

l18
Acting-In
healthy clients. The following issues are only some of the chal-
lenges that should be carefully considered by any group leader:
Selection
The director should be aware of the problems inherent in includ-
ing people who have certain types of problems in a group. These
refer not so much to diagnostic categories so much as issues such
as psychological-mindedness, voluntariness, ego strength, and
access to socioeconomic resources. Voluntariness involves the
degrees to which the prospective group member really wants to
engage in the types of self-reflection that therapeutic or personal
growth-oriented groups require. If people feel pressured to attend
to satisfy family members or the criminal justice system, their role
is undermined by a sense of having been coerced. Psychological
mindedness refers to the degree to which people are able to reflect
on the workings of their own mind. It involves the awareness of
the possibility of self-deception and some degree of ability to be
introspective regarding their own personal beliefs and habits of
mind. The following categories may pose threats to a group or
warrant exclusion on other grounds:
1. Those who are embroiled in a life crisis may dominate the
group's attention unless they have someone else from
whom they can receive counseling. It is not the purpose of
a Broup session to take full responsibility for helping one of
its members to make decisions about major life transitions,
or to cope with losses. Of course, the group may serve as a
useful adjunct in such cases.
2. Those who would likely become disruptive or unusually
demanding should be carefully evaluated in the selection
process, especially clients who are actively psychotic,
depressed, histrionic, or intoxicated with alchohol or any
drugs.
3. Those who are attending the group against the advice of
their therapist risk becoming psychiatric casualties.
Another category of persons who are particularly vulnera-

Principles and Pitfall s
ble to the group process are the alienated and socially iso-
lated who have no network of family or friends to which
they return after the Broup.
4. Those who, against their better judgment, allow themselves
to be overtly or covertly coerced into attending the grouP
may undermine the process. For example, those coming as
part of an institutional in-service training program, as a
requirement of work or at the request of a supervisor or
employer, as part of an educational curriculum in order to
obtain required credits, or under Pressure from family,
friends, or other helping Persons in the community may
sabotage their own and the grouP's development in a num-
ber of ways.
5. Those expecting a level of participation or self-disclosure
that is different from the plans or expectations of the group
Ieader or group may find the experience frustrating. The
director should see to it that the group is informed regard-
ing the proposed group norms before they decide whether
or not to attend. People coming to discuss a social issue
need to know in advance if they will be expected to deal
with personal issues in what may feel like an intrusive or
intimate fashion. On the other hand, if people are coming
for an intensive personal growth experience and the direc-
tor is planning a more superficial exploration of assertion
training strategies, this, too, should be made explicit.
Follou-Up
The director should be in a position to assure her group members
access to further psychotherapy if. needed. It is advisable for the
director to have some (medical) psychiatric support-that is, col-
leagues who can provide medication, hospitalization, or other
forms of crisis intervention. Although these forms of follow-up are
rarely needed, arranging for this back-up reflects the director's
professional awareness of the nature of the impact of group
Process.
r19

120
Acting-In
A recent development has added an interesting challenge to this
theme: Psychodramatists working in psychiatric hospital units
where the average length of stay has been drastically shortened
and the numbers of therapeutic staff reduced must be clear about
ensuring adequate preparation and follow-up for their work. It
may be necessary to modify the use of psychodrama to avoid over-
loading patients (Kane, 1992). Negotiation must be made with the
administration for enough time, for unit staff as cotherapists who
can then communicate with the other therapists, and especially for
the assurance of staff time to attend to patients who need to further
"process" their experiences.
Working with Systems
The director may be asked to lead a group of co-workers or stu-
dents within an organization such as a community agency, a busi-
ness, or a school system. There are some pitfalls to consultation to
systems. It is advisable for the director to be well-versed in princi-
ples of consultation before undertaking the leadership of such a
Broup. Some of the pitfalls include the following:
1. When dealing with co-workers, the director should beware
of the personal vulnerability that can be engendered
through the use of action techniques. For this reason, it is
often better to limit the use of psychodramatic methods to
problem-oriented rather than person-oriented approaches
(i.e., using role playing or sociodrama rather than psy-
chodrama). It is rare that a group of those who live, work,
or study together is so cohesive and free of internal com-
petitiveness that it can tolerate the extensive, symmetrical
self-disclosure that is required in the use of psychodrama.
However, many psychodramatic methods can be adapted
to these Broup situations.
It's important to address issues of confidentiality and
assess which kinds of secrets can be shared in a given
group. Co-workers and coprofessionals may have certain
concerns that deserve thorough discussion. (There is much

Principles ond Pitfalls
t2t
that needs to happen in group process which involves no
enactment, iust straight talk.)
2. The use of physical contact is an especially powerful
modality and should be used with the greatest of caution.
Among adolescents and other groups, the use of touching
and hugging tends to take on a distinctly sexual and/or
threatening significance. If there is to be wrestling, make
sure the area is adequately cushioned or carpeted (Moreno,
1ee4).
3. The group will often subtly manipulate the director into
staging a scene dealing with a co-worker (usually a super-
visor) who is not present. "How do you deal with this per-
son?" is the innocent topic of the role playing. Actually, the
director is being asked to ally against this person as the
group works out its externalizations, displacements, and
avoidance of self-examination. The director should beware
of this trap: The content of the session often backfires when
it comes to the attention of the supervisor.
THE CLIENT.CENTERED SPIRIT OF PSYCHODRAMA
Much of what has been described in this chapter reflects an under-
lying philosophy that is essentially consistent with the spirit of
Carl Rogers' (1951) client-centered therapv.lt should be noted at the
outset that the therapist need not be passive in order to engage
mutually with her client. Rogers' nondirective approach relies on
the therapist's avoidance of determining the content of the inter-
action. It is quite possible, however, for a therapist to be quite
active and directive in helping her client to use a variety of meth-
ods to explore his problem. Thus, as in psychodrama, one can be
directive in terms of process while still maintaining a true client-
centered mutuality.
Rogers'most valuable contribution, in my opinion, has been his
noting the essential conditions for an effective helping relation-
ship, whatever the theoretical orientation of the helper. These con-
ditions include: (a) the authenticity of the way therapists relate to

122
Acting-In
their clients; (b) the establishment of empathic bonds between
therapists and clients; and (c) the therapists' development of a
capacity for positiue regard for their clients. Rogers's ideas are
applicable to educational or consultative as well as therapeutic
contexts.
SUMMARY
When psychodramatic methods are used without the proper
philosophical foundations, the director is in danger of falling into
some common errors. These pitfalls can be avoided if the director
applies certain basic principles that allow the protagonist to devel-
op at his own pace, in a context of mutuality, and without aggres-
sive confrontation from the group leader. In short, they follow the
conditions of client-centered therapy. The director must also
remain aware of such group process issues as problems of selec-
tion and follow-up, the tendency to idealize one approach, and the
ability of the director to tolerate ambiguity.
REFERENCES / RECOMMENDED READINGS
Blank, L. (1971). Confrontation techniques-A two-sided coin. In L. Blank & C.
Gottsegen (Eds.) Confrotrtation: Encoutrlers in self and interpersonal awareness.
New York: Macmillan.
Blatner, A. (1988). Spontaneity (pp. 63-71). In Foundntiotrs of Psychodrarrn. New
York: Springer.
Fink, A. K. (1963). The democratic essence of psychodrama. Group psychotherapy,
15,156-160.
Gazda, G. M. (1975). Some tentative guidelines for ethical practice of group work
pra_ctitioners. In G, M. Gazda (Ed.), Basic approaclrcs to group psychotherapy
and group counseling (2nd ed.) (pp. 55-65). Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomai.
Hurewitz, P. (1970). Ethical considerations in leading therapeutic and quasithera-
peutic groups: Encounter and sensitivity groups. Group Psychotherapy,
23(1-2), 17-20.
Kane, R. (1992). The potential abuses, limitations, and negative effects of classical
psychodramatic techniques in group counseling. lournal of Group
Psychotherapy, Psychodranm & Sociomet ry, 44(4), 181-189.
Knepler, A. E. (1959). Role playing in education-Some problems in its use. Group
P sy chot herapy, 1 2(1), 3241.

Princ iples and Pitfalls
123
Moreno, l. L. (1957). Code of ethics of group psychotherapy. Grou1t Psychothcroprl,
10,143-144.
Moreno, l. D. (1991). Group psychotherapy in bioethical perspective. lournal of
G ro r ry P sycho ! h e m py, P sychttd rn n m €t Sttc i on rc I ry, 44(2), 60-7 0.
Moreno, l. D. (1994). Psychodramatic moral philosophy and ethics. In P' Holmes,
M. Karp, & M. Watson (Eds.), Psycllodrnnn sitrce Morcno: Inuouations in theo'
ry and practicc. London: Routledge.
Morenr:, Z. T. (1969). Psychodramatic rules, techniques, and adjunctive methods.
In J. L. Moren o & Z. T. Moreno, Psr1chttdrann, Vol. 3 (pp. 233-246).
Rogers, C. (1951). Client-cctrtt'rad thcra1n1. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Sandron, L. (1973). Psychodrama with hostile group members. Handbook ttf
I nt e r nnl ional Soc iout' t ry, 7, 29{i6.
Shaffer, Amy. (1995). When the screen is not blank: Transference to the PSy-
chodrama director in theory and clinical practice. lournnl of Group
Psychothernpy, Psychod ronm [t Socionrctry, 48(7), 9-20.
Terner, 1., & Pew, W. L. (1978). Tlrc courngc to hc inrycrfcct: The life nnd work of Rutlolf
Drcikurs (especially pp.288-9). New York: Hawthorne.

8
Applications of Psychodramatic
Methods
Psychodramatic techniques may be effectively used in any field
that requires some exploration of the psychological dimensions of
a problem, such as education, psychotherapy, and industrial rela-
tions. understanding and dealing with contemporary issues often
requires a process of participatory, experiential learning integrated
with verbal and cognitive analysis. This chapter will note some of
the major categories of the contexts in which psychodramatic
methods are currently being applied. of course, each director must
modify the methodology in order to meet the needs of her own
style and ability, as well as the situation of the client and the reali-
ties of her helping role. (In addition, references pertaining to vari-
ous areas of application are listed at the end of this chapter.)
THE MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONS
The most common area in which psychodramatic methods are
applied is in the field of mentalhealth.ln hospitals, clinics, daycare
centers, crisis units, alcohol and drug programs, therapeutic com-
munities, and many other settings, many professionals have found
a role for psychodramatic methods. sometimes psychodrama itself
is used as a distinct program. More often, methods and techniques
derived from psychodrama are integrated into the processes o[
individual, group, and conjoint family therapy.
t24

Applications of Psl,chodramatic Methods
125
Group Therapy
Enactments of varying lengths may be interspersed with periods
of discussion. Action methods (such as those mentioned in the
chapter on warm-ups) can often be woven into the ongoing group
process. Especially effective are the techniques of doubling, role
reversal, and the interiection of an exercise of nonverbal commu-
nication. These function to circumvent some of the verbal impass-
es that occur so often in therapy groups.
For example, at one point in a group session, the members
became involved in a series of abstract generalizations about
philosophical issues. They seemed to have lost their sense of direc-
tion. The conversation was sparse and full of platitudes, and the
members were no longer in touch with their own concerns and
needs. The director threw a book of matches onto the floor in the
middle of the group and told them that this was to be a symbol of
something they all wanted, even though they might not be clear on
just what that was. They were asked to physically deal with the
matchbook, as if it were that valuable "something" they desired.
One member picked it up, played with it, then gave it to another.
A variety of responses followed: a sequence of giving, grabbing,
tearing, holding, offering, and rejecting the book of matches. When
the action was stopped a few minutes later, the group felt it had
quite a bit to talk about: why one person used the matches one
way, and how another person reacted in a different fashion. The
group began to talk about their interactional styles, their associa-
tions to the symbol, and their feelings about the way they had
dealt with it. (ln a different group, a chair was introduced as the
symbol; the increase in physical involvement needed to manipu-
late a chair led to a great deal of group interaction.)
Another group problem is the situation in which a member or a
subgroup is dissatisfied or planning to leave the group. The spcc-
trogrant is a psychodramatic technique that can be used to clarify
the issues and illustrate the feelings of the group: Those feeling one
way place themselves toward one side of the room, those feeling a
different way go to the other side, and those who are indifferent in
the middle (Kole, 7967\. This is followed by a discussion about any
or all of the subgroups, and it helps to minimize the anxiety of

126
Acting-ln
members who feel that they are the only ones in the group who
feel the way they do. In groups dealing with a member of a sub-
group who wants to leave, the facilitator may use the behind-your-
back technique. Using this technique, those who wish to leave may
symbolically do so by turning their backs, and the rest of the group
is instructed to discuss their leaving as if it had actually happened.
(It should be noted that the behind-your-back technique can be a
very powerful and potentially destructive method of confrontation
unless used with skill and iudgment.) As the group talks, those
who have "left the group" may be tempted to reenter the group in
order to correct misunderstandings and represent their case. They
might also hear that there are others in the group who sympathize
with them and defend them, and this too may induce them to
return. In either case, the technique offers a shared experience that
the group will then be able to discuss with an increased feeling of
cohesion (Figure 8.1).
Figure 8.1
A third example is illustrated in a therapy group with adoles-
cents. Bill, a young man, was explaining his tendency to joke and
be superficial in his relationships with others. He said that he was
aware that he was not letting himself become "close." Bill
explained that he was afraid he would be deeply hurt if he were to
o
e

Applications of Psvchodramtttic Melhods
r27
be rejected after he had allowed himself to really care about anoth-
er person. He said that he wouldn't be able to stand it. The thera-
pisi and Bill set up some scenes in which he would be rejected.
^lr4oving between the role of one who is reiected and an observer of
the situation, he was helped to desensitize himself to this fear. In
addition, the underlying beliefs and feelings of shame were
brought out. [n facing these issues, Bill learned that being rejected
need not result in a catastrophic injury to one's self-esteem;
indeed, although he was hurt, he was strong enough not to break
down. This sense of inner strength was an enioyable alternative to
Bill's rationalized avoidance of closeness, and was reinforced by
the group norm of not having to treat each other "with kid gloves."
In similar ways, this technique can be used to enact threats of
loss of control over love, anger, grief, and other emotions, as well
as other excuses for avoiding goal-directed behavior. The result of
these enactments, in which the fear is faced, results in an increas-
ing sense of self-control.
Family Therapy and Marital Counseling
Psychodramatic methods can escalate the interchange to a more
auihentic level of emotional encounter, which, in turn, facilitates a
more productive exploration of the problems in the relationships
among the participants (Blatner, 1994)'
In some marital couple therapy meetings it becomes apparent
that an "adversary system" has been established in the couple's
relationship; that is, each partner seems to be trying to "win" by
justifying personal actions and blaming the other's behavior. For
example, Nancy and Doug seemed to be stuck in complaining
abouf what they do not want the other to do or say. In such con-
frontations,l have utilized the technique of role reversal, directing
each person to take the part of the spouse. Then, I address them
usingthe spouse's name and ask them in-role to tell each other, not
whal they do not want, but rather what they do want. If it seems
that the person caricaturizes the partner by demanding the obvi-
ously impossible, I point this out, and encourage a more realistic
portrayal. This approach, I found, has frequently "broken" the

128 
Acfing-In
mental set in which each partner views the other as uncaring, self-
ish, or withholding.
PSYCHODRAMATIC METHODS WITH CHILDREN
AND ADOLESCENTS
Psychodramatic techniques are utilized to help young people
explore the emotional conflicts in their lives at all age levels, and
in all contexts-in the home, the child guidance clinic, residential
treatment centers, speech and hearing clinics, nursery schools,
recreation centers, summer camps, or the classroom. It is often
used ir-sifa when a situation arises on the playground, in the front
yard, or wherever the problem occurs (Figure 8.2).
In addition, psychodramatic methods, when modified for the
setting, can be remarkably effective for children with relativery
poor cognitive and verbal skills-such as the mentally retarded or
preadolescent delinquents. lndeed, the use of role-playing tech-
niques is a valuable approach to building verbal skills in these
action-prone children. Furthermore, psychodramatic techniques
can be integrated with other forms of activity, play, and story-
telling therapies.
IN SITU:
Figure 8.2

Applications of Psvchod ramatic M ethods
APPLICATIONS IN PRIMARY AND SECONDARY
EDUCATION
Psychodramatic methods can be applied in many different school
settings. Most of the time, the use of these methods should be lim-
ited to role-playing or sociodrama. This is because the more per-
sonal explorations that are involved in psychodrama may lead to
too much self-disclosure for the protagonist in a context of peers.
In the following contexts the teacher or counselor can make good
use of psychodramatic methods:
1. Discussion of class nnterial. Historical, Iiterary, or contempo-
rary social problems can all be addressed through role
playing. Classes on the more comPlex personal relations
involved in family life education programs may use role-
playing materials to explore dating and marriage relation-
ships, conflict resolution, and so on.
2. Creatiae dranntics is a field that is receiving widespread
attention in many contemporary school settings, especially
in Great Britain, Australia, and to some extent in Canada.
However, the effectiveness of creative dramatics is in direct
proportion to the degree to which the children are allowed
to throw away their scripts and begin to improvise.
3. Special situations. Community crises relating to interracial
strife, drug abuse programs, parent-student conflicts, or
other issues of current attention can often become the focus
of a sociodrama in a classroom or at an entire school assem-
bly.
4. Special educotion.ln special classes for children with learn-
ing disabilities, psychodramatic methods are used to help
with the common problems of defeatism, behavior prob-
lems, and poor self-esteem. These special education classes
include children who have specific learning disabilities, are
severely emotionally disturbed or psychotic, or have
behavior problems of hyperactivity.
r29

130
Acting-ln
A common theme of concern to children in special educa-
tion is being different. This problem can be dealt with by
including role playing as part of group discussions. Other
children who can benefit from exploring the emotional
aspects of their disease are those with asthma, diabetes,
deafness, blindness, or other crippling handicaps.
5. Learning about feelings. Increasing attention is being given to
the challenge of teaching children about their feelings,
along with the development of coping skills in interperson-
al relationships. Once called "affective education," more
recent terms include the development of "emotional intelli-
gence" or "emotional literacy" (Goleman,1995). The use of
psychodramatic methods in the schools can catalyze this
education for human awareness and has many potential
benefits, if the approach is modified appropriately to the
task at hand (Blatner, 1995).
PROFESSIONAL TRAINING
An important area for the applications of psychodramatic methods
is in the development of interpersonal skills and sensitivity for stu-
dents in training for the helping professions. Teachers, nurses, pas-
tors, policemen, medical students, and many other groups can best
deal with some items in their training. through experiential rather
than didactic modes of education.
For example, the problem of death and bereavement in our cul-
ture was one of the items brought up in a postgraduate develop-
ment program for a group of nursery school teachers. Using psy-
chodrama, the experience of grieving was explored. One teacher in
the group started by asking how to deal with a child's questions
about death. This led to another one of the teacher's enacting the
loss of a spouse, which catalyzed a dramatic and emotion-filled
catharsis by many of the teachers as they shared their own experi-
ences of mourning. The results were: (a) a heightening of each
group member's ability to help others with bereavement by using
the empathy that arises from contact with personal feelings; (b) an

Ap pl icat io tts of P svc hod ranrat ic M e t hctd s
r31
awareness of the importance of sharing the experience, talking
about the feelings of grief rather than avoiding the issue, of the
need for touching and physical contact; and (c) an increased toler-
ance and openness not only to the experience of grief in the SrouP
members themselves and others, but also tolerance for the defens-
es against the expression of grief. These experiences enabled the
group members to relate to the children and each other with
greater authenticity.
Certainly, the problem of learning to help others grieve demands
an experiential form of training. Nurses, medical personnel, and
others who must deal with this reality in their work could benefit
from understanding the stressful situation through role playing.
Not only is the problem of bereavement an issue for experiential
training, but learning to help others with any complex role transi-
tion is a challenge. The plight of the young mother, the father of his
first newborn, the man who has suffered a small stroke, the
prospect of compulsory retirement are all subiects that involve a
wide range of status changes and the demand for shifts in role
behavior and values. Those who are in training for positions in
which they will be helping people with life crises such as these
would benefit from participating in rolc-playing situations that are
part of discussion seminars.
APPLICATIONS IN BUSINESS & INDUSTRY
Classical psychodrama would rarely be appropriate for most work
situations, for the same reason that one should not use psychodra-
ma in the classroom: A context with co-workers usually has more
internal competition and distrust than people may wish to admit
to themselves. Limited applications of psychodramatic methods,
however, such as the use of role playing and action techniques, are
widely used in industrial psychological consulting.
As in the fields of professional training, the major application of
role playing in industry is to develop the skills of managers and
the personnel and sales staff. In addition, sociodramatic skills are
often useful in resolving informal management-labor conflicts or
other difficulties in communication. Most important, however, are

132
Acting-In
0 I
Figure E.3
the challenges of developing a broader imagination as to the impli-
cations of industry's actions in contemporary society and the
building of psychological-interpersonal sophistication in manage-
ment (Figure 8.3).
The potential director of role playing in an organization must
become aware of the fundamental principles of consultation, the
different needs of the clients, and the many competing agendas of
the group (see Chapter 7). Nevertheless, if the management con-
sultant is well trained, knowledge of appropriate psychodramatic
methods can vastly extend the effectiveness of the work.
APPLICATIONS IN RELIGION
It is interesting to note that Moreno's ideas about creativity and
spontaneity were first reflected in his poetic and theological
works, which were written before he ever developed the psy-
chodramatic method as a psychotherapeutic technique. Moreno's

Applications of Psvchodramatic Methods
133
writings about the dynamic encounter between a human being
and God in a cocreative relationship take on new relevance today,
as contemporary religious trends expand to include ideas from
other philosophies.
Moreno's word for enactments that deal with ultimate values
and concerns is axiodrarta. Through modifications of psychodra-
matic methods, a minister can search for more vivid and personal
ways to help others to experience the challenge and significance of
prayer, meditation, death, ethics, and so forth.
Some possible enactments that could be used as an introduction
to a religious psychodrama include: the relationship between Jesus
and Judas, "The Grand Inquisitor" (Dostoyevsky's story within
The Brothers Karannzou), the judgment in heaven (discussed in the
therapeutic context in Chapter 5), or the creation of a ritual for
Christmas or Passover that is personally meaningful. Pitzele's
(1995) work in "Biblio-drama" is an especially interesting example
of this adaptation of sociodramatic techniques.
SUMMARY
Psychodramatic methods can be applied to achieve many kinds
of goals and in a variety of contexts. This chapter has presented
some of the major categories in which psychodramatic methods
can be used, as well as providing references related to each area of
application and several other topic areas in addition'
REFERENCES / RECOMMENDED READINGS
A.lnpatient Treatment
Anzieu, D. (19S2). Psychodrama as technique of the psychoanalysis of institu-
tions. In M. Pines & L. Rafaelsen (Eds.), The indiuidunl and the group:
Bormdarics otrd interralations: Vol. 1. Theory @p.379-387). New York: Plenum.
Buchanan, D. R., & Dubbs-Siroka, r. (1980). Psychodramatic treatment for psychi-
atric patients. Nalrolnl Associotion of Priwte Psvchintric Hupitnls lournol,
11(21,27-31.
DiCori, F. (1977). Psychodrama in a hospital setting. In S. Arieti & G.
Chrzantrwski (Eds.), Nrro dilrcnsrorrs in Pry1sltins7r, A twrld uiau. (Yol.2, pp.
273-304). New York Wiley.

134
Acting-In
Gonen, l. (1971). The use of psychodrama combined with videotape playback on
a n inpatie'nt floor. P sy ch ia t ry, 34(2), 1 98-21 3.
Johnson, D. R. (1984). Representation of the internal world in catatonic schizo-
phrenia. Psych ia t ry, 47, 299-31 4.
Jones, M. (1953). The therapeutic conmrunity (pp. 6346). New York: Basic Books.
Psychodrama was used as part of this pioneering experiment.
Ploeger, A. (1982). The therapeutic community and the psychodrama; Relations
and countereffect in the therapeutic process. In M. Pines & L. Rafaelsen
(Eds.), Tfte indittitlual and the group (pp. 193-197). New York: Plenum.
Polansky, N. A., & Harkins, E. B. (1969). Psychodrama as an element in hospital
treatment. Psychiatry, i2(l), 7 4-87.
Rabiner, C. J., & Drucker M. (1967). Use of psychodrama with hospitalized schiz-
ophrenic patients. Diseases of the Neroous Systent, 22,34-38.
Sakles, C. (1968). The place of psychodrama in an inpatient psychiatric treatment
p rogram. C r o up P sy cho I he r apy, 21 (4), 235-240.
Schatzberg, A., Lobis, R., & Westfall, M. P. (1974). The use of psychodrama in the
hospital setting. Anrcrican lournal of Psychotlrcrapy, 28(4), 553-565.
Starr, A., & Weisz, H. S. (1989). Psychodramatic techniques in the brief treatment
of inpatient groups. lndioidual Psychology: lournal of Atllerian Theory, Research
& Pract ice, 45(1-2), 743-147.
B, Alcoholism and Chemical Dependency
Blume, S. (1977). Psychodrama in the treatment of alcoholism. In N. Estes & E.
Heinemann (Eds.), Alcoholism, daaelopnrcnt, consequetrces and interaenlions. St.
Louis: Mosby.
BIume, S. (1978). Psychodrama and the treatment of alcoholism. In S. Zimberg, I.
Wallace & S. Blume (Eds.), Practical approaches to alcoholism psychotherapy (pp.
77-97). New York: Plenum.
Blume, S. (1989). Treatment for the addictions in a psychiatric setting. Britisft
lournal of Addiction, 84(7), 727 -729.
Duffy, T. K. (1990). Psychodrama in beginning recovery: An illustration of goals
and methods. Alcoholism Treatnrcnt Quarterly, 7 (2), 97-709.
Moffett, L., & Bruto, L. (1990). Therapeutic theatre with personality-disordered
substance abusers: Characters in search of different characters. The Arts in
Psy chol he rnpy, 17, 339-348.
Weiner, H. (1965). Treating the alcoholic with psychodrama. Group Psychotherapy,
18('t-2),27-2e.
Weiner, H. (1967). Psychodramatic treatment for the alcoholic. In R. Fox (Ed.),
Alcoholism: Behattiorol research, therapeutic a\tproaches. New York: Springer.
Wood, D., Del Nouvo, A., Bucky, S. F., Schein, S., & Michalik, M. (1979).
Psychodrama with an alcohol abuser population. Croup Psychotlrcrapv,
Psychodronm, & Sociometry, 32, 75-88.

Applications of Psvchctdranrutic Methods
135
Yablonsky, L., & Manzella, L. (1991). Psychodrama as an integral part of a thera-
peuiic commu nity. lournal of Group Psychothcropy, Psychodrama & Socionrctry,
44(3),121-125.
C, Outpatient Group Psychotherapy
Aronson, M. L. (1990). Integrating Moreno's psychodrama and psychoanalytic
group therapy. lottrnol of Groult Psychothernlty, Psychodranu [t Socionrctry,
42(4),1e9-203.
Beagan, D. (1985). Spontaneity and creativity in the N[ationallH[ealth]S[service]:
Starting a new group psychodrama with adult day patients. British lounul of
Occ upational Tlrcrayry, 48(12), 370-37 4.
Blatner, H. (1968). Goal-orientation and action-orientation as two criteria for
patient selection in group psychotherapy. Voices, 4(3), 90-95.
Collison, C. R., & Miller, S. L. (1985). The role of family reenactment in group psy-
chotherapy. P c rspec t ittcs i n P sy chi a t r ic Ca ra, 23(2), 7 4-78.
Emunah, R. (1983). Drama therapy with adult psychiatric patients. The Arts In
Psychothcropy, 10, 77 -84.
Kole, D. (1967). The spectroSram in psychodrama. Group Psychotherapy,20(1-2\,
5H1.
Mintz, E. E. ('1974). On the dramatization of psychoanalytic interpretations. In L.
R. Wolberg & M. L. Aronson (Eds.), Grorlp thern1tt1,1974. New Yttrk: Stratton
Intercontinental Medical Book Corp.
Naar, R. (1982). A printar ol groult psych<tthcrnprl. New Ytlrk: Human Sciences Press.
( Especia lly pp.'177 -203).
Nicholas, M. W. (1984). Chnugt itt thc ctttttcxl of group lhunpy. New York:
Brunner/Mazel.
Olsson, P. A. (1989). Psychodrama and group therapy approaches kr alexithymia.
In D. A. Halperin (Ed.), Crol4r psychodynanrics: Nt'tu paradignts nrrl neu Pcr-
rJrcclirrcs (pp 168-180). Chicago: Year Book Medical.
Shaffer, J. 8., & Galinsky, M. D. (1974). Modc/s of gntult thcrnltrl and scnsitittitv troin-
,rS (pp. 108-127). Englewood Cliffs, Nf : Prentice-Hall.
D. Family Therapy
BIatner, A. (1994). Psychodramatic methods in family therapy. In C. E. Schaefer &
L. Carey (Eds.), Fnlrilr7 plny thuopy (pp. Z:S- 246). Northvale, Nf: fason
Aronson.
Clrasin, R., & Roth, S. (1994). Entering one another's worlds of meaning and
imagination: Dramatic enactment and narrative couple therapy. In M. F.
Hoyt (Ed.), Constrttctioa Thara1ties. New York: Guilford.
Chasin, R., Roth, S., & Bograd, M. (1989). Action methods in systemic therapy:
Dramatizing ideal futures and reformed pasts with couples. Fnruilv Process,
28(1),121-13s.

136 
Acting-ln
Comp_ernolle. T. (1981). J. L. Moreno: An unrecognized pioneer of family therapy.
F anrily Process, 20, 331-335.
Drake, B. (1975). Psychoanalytically oriented psychodrama with multiple family
groups. A nrcr ic a n I o ur na I ol O r t hopsy ch iat ry, 4 S (2), 2ffi_261.
Duhl, F. J., Kantor; D., & Duhl, B. S. (1973). Learning, space and action in family
therapy: {fr1m9r of sculpture. In D. A. Bloch (Ed.), Techniques of family thei
apy. New York: Grune and Stratton.
Guldner, c. A. (1982). Multiple family psychodramatic therapy. lournar of Group
Psychotherapy, Psychodrama, & Sociometry, 3S(2), 4Z-56.
Hollander, c. E. (1983). Comparative family systems of Moreno and Bowen.
Iournal of Croup Psychotherapy, Psychodrama et Sociontetry, 35(1),1-12.
Hollander, s. (1981). spontaneity, sociometry and the warming up process in fam-
ily therapy. lournol of Group psychotierapy, psychodrani, b'sociontetry, 34,
4q-53.
Holmes, P. (1993). The roots of enactment: The process in psychodrama, family
fhelapy and_psychoanalysis. lournal of Group psychottieripy, psychodrann b
Soc iome t ry, 45(4), 149-162.
Lee, R. H. (1986,). The family therapy trainer as coaching double. lonrnal of Grotry
Psychotherapy, Psychodrama I Socionretry, 39(21, SZ-1Z.
Perrott, L (1985). using psychodramatic techniques in structural family therapy.
Contenrporary F amily Therapy, 8(4), 229-290.
Remer R. (1985). Use of psychodramatic intervention with families: change on
1uf!ipl9 levels. lournal of Group psychotherapy, psychodrama, €+ Sociolnetry,
39(l), t3-30.
Rozema, H..|.,-& Gray, M. A. (1987). stimulus activities for family communication.
lournal of Group Psychotherapy, psychodrann, & Socionrctry, 4O1t1,ZZ<2.
seeman, H., & Mener, D. J. (1985). Comparing and using psychodrama with fam-
r_!y therapy' Some cautions. lournal of Group Osyctdttrirapy, psychodranra, [t
Soc ionret ry, 37 (4), I 43-157.
McKelvie, w. H. (1987). .Kinetic fam.ily xulpture: Experiencing family change
through time. Indioidual Psychology: lotirnal of Atilerian Ttleory, Risearchb
P ract ice, 4 3(2), 160-773.
E. Child Psychotherapy afld "ln The Hone"
Barsky, M., & Mozen ter, c. (1976). The use of creative drama in a children's group.
lnternational lournal of Croup Psychotherapy,26, lO-74.
Carpenter, P., & Sandberg,S. (19731. "The things inside,,: psychodrama with delin-
quent adolescents. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and Practice, l0(3),245-242.
chasin, R., & white, T. (1989). The child in family therapy: Guiderines for active
engagement across the age span. In L. Combrinck-Graham (Ed.l, Children in
fnntily conficts (pp. 5-25). New York: Cuilford.

Applications of Psychodramatic Methods
137
Creekmore, N. N., & Madan, A. J. (1981). The use of sociodrama as a therapeutic
technique with behavior disordered children. Behauioral Disorders' 7(l)'
2U33.
Goodrich, J., & Goodrich, W. (1986). Drama therapy with a learning disabled, per-
sonality disordered adolescent. The Arts itt Psychotlurapy, 13,285-291.
Irwin, E. C., & Curry, N. E. (1993). Role play. In C. E. Schaefer (Ed.)'The therapeu-
tic powers o/play. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.
Levenson, R. L., Jr., & Herman, ,. (1991). Role playing in child psychotherapy.
Psychotherapy: Theory, Rcsenrch, & Practice,28,6[r0-fl66. Also reprinted in C'8.
Sclraefer 1ii.7, Otayineropy teclttriques. Northvale, NJ: ]ason Aronson, 1993.
Shearon, E. M. (1978). Psychodrama with children' Group Psychotherapy,
Psychodrnma, & Sociomet ry, 33, 142-155.
F. Ailolescents and Delinquency
Altman, K. P. (1985). The role.taking interview: An assessment technique for ado-
lescents. Adolescence, 20(80), 845-851.
Carpenter, P., & Sandberg, S. (1985). Further psychodrama with delinquent ado-
lescents. Adoltscencc, 20(79), 59944.
Corder, B. F., & Whiteside, R. (1994). Involving parents in structured therapy
groups ftrr adolescents. ltturnal of Child €t Adolescent Group Thcrapy,4(3)'
157-167.
Dushman, R. D., & Bressler, M. l. (1991). Psychodrama in an adolescent chemical
dependency treatment Program. I n d iu i d ual P sy chol ogy, 47 (4), 515-520.
Emunah, R. (1990). Expression and expansion in adolescence: The significance of
creative arts therapy. The Arts in Psychothualty, '17, l0l-107.
Guldner, C. A. (1990). Family therapy with adolescents. lournal of Croup
P sy c I rtt t ha ra1ty, P sy chttd ra n m fs Soc io n rct ry, 43(3), I 42-l 50.
Holmes, P. (1984). Boundaries or chaos: An outpatient psychodrama gnrup for
ad olescents. I o u r n ol of Ad ol escc tt ct', 7 (4), 387 40(J.
Knittel, M. (1990). Strategies for directing psychodrama with the adolescent.
lournal ttf Cruup PsychothL'ropv, Psyclntdranm & Sociondry,4S(3), lf6-120.
Levettrn, E. (1984). Atlolcsccnt crisis. New Ytrrk: Springer. Especially pp.77-97.
Olsson, P. A., & Myers, l. L. (1972). Nonverbal techniques in an adolescent gnrup.
I n t c r n a t irt nal I tru r nnl of G ro u p P sy chol ha rnpy, 22(2), 18G191.
Saroyan, J. S. (1990). The use of music therapy on an adolescen-t psychiatric unit.
'lournol t{Crttult Psychttthcrapy, Psychodrann €t Socionrctry,43(3),139-141.
Sasson, F. (1990). Psychodrama with adolescents: Management techniques that
work. /orrrrrnl t{ Group Psychtttlrcrnpv, Psychodraun fi Socionrelrv, 43(31,
121-127.
tNarzak, W I., & Page, T. l. (1990). Teaching refusal skills to sexually active adoles-
cenls. lournal of Btlunittr Thcropy €t Exln'rinrcnlal Psychiolr7,2l(2), 133-139.

138
Acting-In
Weil, F., Pascal, M., Kaddar, Y., & Luboshitzky,D. (1990). The place of verbal games
in the framework of inpatient group psychotherapy with late adolescents.
lournal of Group Psyclrctheropy, Psyclrcdrama & Sociontet ry, 43(3), 12g-138.
G, Mental Retardation
Bailey- s. D. (1993). wings to /ly: Bringing theatre arts to students uith special ncetls.
Rockville, MD: Woodbine House.
Buchan, L, G. (1972). Roleplaying and the educable mentttlly retarded. Belmont, CA:
Fearon.
Chesner, A. (1995). Dramatherapy for people with learning disabilities: A world of dif-
ference. London: Jessica Kingsley.
Klepac, R. L. (1978). Through the looking glass: Sociodrama and mentally retard-
ed ind ivid ua ls. Men t al Re t a rda t ion, 1 615y, l+l- US.
Newburger, H. (1967). Psychodrama treatment with the brain damaged. Group
P sy chot hernpy, 20(3), 1 29-l 30.
Pankratz, L., & Buchan, G. (1966). Techniques of warm-ups in psychodrama with
the retarded. Me n t a I Re ta rda t ittn, 4{5), 12-16.
Tayloq, I. F. (1969). Role-playing with borderline and mildly retarded children in
an institutional setting. Except ionnl Child ren, 35, 206-208.
H. Other Disabilities
Aach, S. (1976). Drama: A means of self-expression for the visually impaired
child. Nezu Outlook for the Blind 70(7),282- 285.
Altman, K. P. (1981). Psychodrama with blind psychiatric patients. lourna! of
Visunl lntpairtnent & Blindness, 75(4), 153 156.
Clayton, L., & Robinson, L. D. (1971). Psychodrama with deaf people. Anrcrican
Annals of the Deaf,116(4),415419.
Swink, D. F. (1983). The use of psychodrama with deaf people. lournal of Group
P s y c h o t h e r ap y, P s y cho d r a m a €t So c i o t t t e t ry, 3 6 (1), 23-29.
Schlanger, Pj H, & Birkmann, M. H. (1978). Role playing used to elicit language
from hearing-impaired children. Group Psycholherapy, psychodraita -&
S oc iom e t ry, 31, 136-1.43.
Wolpg, Z. (1957). Play therapy, psychodrama, and parent counseling. In
Travis (Ed.), Hnndbook of speech pathology (pp. 1006-1015). New
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
l. Education
Amies, 8.. Warren, 8., & Watling, R. (1986). Social drama: Towards a therapeutic cur-
riculum. London: fohn Clare Books.
Bell, S. (1981). Sociodrama as an instructional approach for teaching about excep-
tional children and youth. lournal for Special Educators,'17(4),321-325.
L. E.
York:

Applicatiotts of Pstchodra,nalic Methods
139
Blatner, A,, & Blatner, A. (1988). Applying sociodramatic methods in education. In
The ort of ploy: An adult's guiclc to racloining imagination nnd spontaneity (pp.
142-751,,188-189). New York: Human Sciences Press.
Blatner, A. (1995). Drama in education as mental hygiene: A child psychiatrist's
perspective. You t h Tl n'n t re I o u r nal, 9, 92-96.
Courtney, R. (1980). The dromntic curricttlunr. New York: Drama Book Specialists.
Duveen, J., & Solomon,J. 0994\. The great evolution trial: Use of role-play in the
classroom. lournol of Rcsearch itr Sciance Taoching, 31 (5): 575-582.
Goleman, D. (1995). Enxtlittnol intclligenca. New York: Bantam'
Haas, R. B. (1949). Psych<tdrann and socittdrnntn in Anrcrican cducation. Beacon, NY:
Beacon House.
Hollander, C. E. (1978). Psychodrama, role playing and sociometry: Living and
learning processes. ln D. Kurpius (Ed.), Leorning: Making learning enoiron-
nrcnts nioic cffactiua (pp. 168- 241). Muncie,lN: Accelerated Development.
Kritzerow, P. (1990). Active learning in the classroom: The use of group role plays.
Ta o c I r i t r g Socitrft r.gV, 1 I (2\, 223-225.
Lee, T. (1991). The sociodramatist and sociometrist in the primary school. Jourtnl
of Groult Psyclntthcra 1ty, Psrlchod rnnm 0 Socionrct ry, 43(4), 191-196.
Maier, H. W. (1991). Role playing: Structures and educational obiectives.lournnl ttf
Chiltl nnd Youtlt Cnra,6(4), 145-150.
Mathis, J. A., Fairchild, L., & Cannon, T' M. (1980)' Psychodrama and srrciodrama
in primary and secondary education. Psyclrolog,v itr thc Schottls, 17(1),96-101.
Milroy, E. (1982). Rttlt-ylny: A yrncticol Srrir/c. Aberdeen, Scotland: Aberdeen
University Press.
Nieminen, S. (1986). Using psychodramatic techniques as a means of preventive
menta I hea lth work irr Finland. Sc/rtrrr/ Ps.yclro I og,y I n t c r na t i o nol, 7 (2), 94-97 .
Pearson-Davis, S. (1989). Drama irr the curriculunr for troubled young people.
|otrnol of Grttup Psrlcltolhcrupr1, Psychtttlranm €, S.rci.,nrctry, 41(4),161-174.
Shaftel, F., & Shaftel, G. (1982). Rola-ltlnrlitrg itr thc curriiltlum (2nd ed.). Englewood
Cliffs, Nl: Prerrtice-Hall. A revised edition of the authors' Roh' Plotting lor
Sociol Volucs,7967.
Shearorr, E. M., & Shearon, W. (1973). Some uses of psychodrama in education.
C ro t r y P s y c I ut I h c r n p v {,r P s 11 c h <td rn n t o, 2 5 (34), 47 -53'
Stanford, C., & Roark, A. (1975). Role playing and action methods in the class-
rorrm. Grotr;r P sy cl ttt I I n' rn py I P sy chotl rn n n, 28, 3349.
Sturkie, J., & Cassady, M. (1992). Aclirr.g il (rttl iunior. San )ose, CA: Resource
Publications.
Varr Mentz, M. (1983). Thc cffcctiue usa of rrtbltlny: A hondbook lor tcochars and lroin-
crs. London: Kogan Page.
Warren, B. (1995). Crcnlirrg n tlu'atrt itr your c/ttssrtxrttt. York, Canada: Captus Press.

140
Acting-In
l. Prcfessional Training
Barton, D., & Crowder, M. K. (1975). The use of role playing techniques as an
instructional aid in teaching about dying, death indbereavemeit. omega,
5(3),243-250.
Beglen, G. G. (1983). The rlse of psychodramatic and sociometric techniques in the
r1-sqrvi.ce training of residential treatment child care staft. lournai of Group
P sy chot h e rapy, P sy chodr ama, €t S oc io m e t ry, 3 G(11, 13-22.
Costa, J., & walsh, s. (1991). A psychodrama group for professional clinicians.
Britislt lournal of Psychod rama, 5(l), 24-32.
Drew, N- (1990). Psychodrama in nursing education. lournal of Group
P sy c hot h e r apy, P sy chod r a n n & S oc io nr e t ry, 43 (2), S4-i2.
Holmes, P. (1991). "Dont tell us-show us": The use of role play in the teaching of
psychoanalytic theory. British lournal of psychodrama, Agi, nlO.
Kippg-L D. A., & Ben-Ely. Z. (19791. The effectiveness of the psychodramatic dou-
ble method, the reflection method, and lecturing in the tiaining of empathy.
lournal of Clinical Psychology, 35(2),37V375
Kranz, P., & Huston, K. (1984). The use of psychodrama to facilitate supervisee
development in Master's level counseling students. lournal iy Croup
P sy chot herapy, P sy c hod ra ma, I Soc ionrc t ry, 37 O), 12G|134.
Mansfield, F. (1991). Supervised role play in the teaching of the process of con-
sultation. Med ical Education, 25(6), 495490.
Reed, E. I. (1984). Using psychodrama with critical care nurses. Dimensions of
Critical Care N ursing, 3(2), 110-114.
Rosnow R. L. (1990). Teaching research ethics through role play and discussion.
Teaching of Psychology, 17 (3), 179-181.
Thacker, A. K. (1984). Using psychodrama to reduce "bumout,, or role fatigue in
the.helping professions. lournal of Group psychotherapy, psychodrinu &
Sociomet ry, 37 (1), 14-26.
Vander Yny,I., & Peake, T. (1980). Psychodrama as a psychotherapy supervision
technique. Croup Psychotherapy, Psychodranm & Sociometry, 33', ZS-{Z.
wolff, T. K., & Miller, D. A. (1993). Using roleplaying to teach the psychiatric inter-
view. lournal of Group Psychotherapy, psychodrama & Sociomitry, 46(2),43-51.
K. lndustry, Business, and Organizational Dea elopment
Brewer, u. (1993). Using the role reversal technique in an industrial setting.
lournal of Group Psychotherapy, Psychodrann & Socionretry, 46(2,), ZTZ4.
Eitington, ,. E. (1989). Role playing. ln Tlrc Winning Trainer (2nd Ed.) (pp. 6Z-93).
Houston: Gulf Publishing.
Greenberg J., & Eskew D. E. (1993). The role of role playing in organizational
resea rch. I o u r n al of Ma na ge n r e n t, 1 g (2), 221 -241.

A p pl icat ions of Psvchod ramat ic M e t hod s
t4t
Hoffman, C. C., Wilcox, L., Comez, E., & Hollander, C. (1992). Sociometric appli-
cations in a corporate environment. lournnl ol Group Psychothernpy,
Psychodrnnn & Socionrclry, 45(1), 3-l6.
Lippitt, R., & Hubbell, A. (1956). Role playing for personnel and guidance work-
ers: Review of the literature. Croup Psvchotherapy,9(2),89-114.
Shaw, M. E., Corsini, R., Blake, R., & Mouton, ,. (1980). Rolc playing: A practical
nmnual for group facilitotors. San Diego, CA: University Associates. Excellent
bibliography, oriented mainly to business and organizational audiences.
This is a reworking of the 196l edition entitled Role-playing in Business and
lndustry, with Corsini as the first author.
Swink, D. F. (1993). Role-play your way to learning. Training ond Deaelopment,
47(5), e1-e7.
Torrance, E. P., & Wright, I. A. (1987). Scrciometric audience technique as a device
for maximizing creativity in problem solving in large Broups. Thc Creatiua
Child antl Adult Qunrterly, 12(3), 147-151.
Wohlking, W., & Weiner, H. (1971). Structured and spontaneous role playing:
Contrast and comparison. Ifi W. Wohlking (Ed.), Ro[' playing: Its opplication
. 
in nanagcnrcnl darylopnrcnt (pp. 1-11). New York: Cornell University Press.
L. Religion
Carvalho, E. S. (1986). Christian reconciliation: A psychodramatic contribution.
I rtu r n a I ry' Psycft oltlg.y tt Ch r i sl i a n i t v, 5( 1 ), 5-l 0.
Johnson, P. E. (1959). lnterpersonal psychology of religion: Moreno and Brrber.
G rtt u p P sycl utt hcrnpy,'l 2, 211-2'l,7.
Kraus, C. (1984). Psychr.rdrama for fallen gods: A review of Morenean thettlogy.
Itturnnl of Croup Psrlchotherapy, Psyclndrnnm tt Sociruuctrv, 37(21,47-&.
Mrrreno, f . L. (1948). Experimental theology. Socialry,2(l-21,93-98.
Nolte, J., Smallwrxrd, C., & Weistart, ). (1975). Role reversal with God. Grorrlr
P st1 c ho t I n rn 1t y €t P sr1 c I tod r o n t a, 2 8, 7 0-7 6.
Pitzele, P. (T995). Our.fntlu,rs'tutlls: A prsonol tncoutttr ruith llu' nrylh ry'Gc'rrmrs. San
Francisco: HarperCollins.
Pitzele, P. (1996). Scripturt rrrirrdoros: Thaonl nnd ltractica of Biblicol psrlchttdrann. Los
Angeles: Torah Aura Productions.
M. Cfiminal lustice System
Barocas, H. (1972). Psychodrama techniques in training police in family crisis
intervention tra ining. G ro u p Psyc I tot I tc ropy n nd Psyc I nxl ranm, 25, 3O-31.
Buchanan, D. R. (1981). Action nrethods for the criminal iustice system. Fedtnl
P rttbot itt n, 45, l7 -25.
Melnick, M. (1984). Skills through drama: The use of professional theater tech-
niques in the treatment and education of prison and ex<rffender populations.
lournnl ttf Croup Psyclttttharapy, Psychodrnnm, €r Sociunttn1,37(3), 104-116.

t42
Acting-ln
Schramski, T. G., & Harvey, D. R. (1983). The impact of psychodrama and role
playing in the correctional environment. International lournal of Oflender
T he r apy & Co n ry a r a t io e C r i m i no lo gy, 27 (3\, 243-254.
Stallone, T, M. (1993). The effects of psychodrama on inmates within a structured
residential behavior modification program. lournal of Group Psychotherap1,
P sychod r nnm & Soc ion re t r y, 46(2\, 24-31.
Swink, D. F., Siegel, J., & Spodak, B. (1984). Saint Elizabeths Hospital Action
Training Lab for Police. lournal of Croup Psychotherapy, Psychodranm, €t
Sociometry, 37(3), 94-1 03.
N. With the Elderly
Altman, K. P. (1983). Psychodrama with the institutionalized elderly: A method
ftrr role re-engagement. lournal of Group Psychotherapy, Psychodrann, €t
S oc ion rc t ry, 36(3), 87 -96.
Buchanan, D. R. (1982). Psychodrama: A humanistic approach to psychiatric treat-
ment for the elderly. Hospital & Conmrunity Psychiatry, 33(3),220-223.
Carman, M., & Nordin, S. (1984). Psychodrama: A therapeutic modality for the
elderly in nursing homes. Clinical Cerontologist,3(Fall), 15-24.
Johnson, D. R. (1986). The developmental method in drama therapy: Group treat-
ment with the elderly. Arts itr Psychotlterapy, 13(l), 17-33.
Martin, R. 8., & Stepath, S. A. (1993). Psychodrama and reminiscene for the geri-
atric psychiatric patient. lournal of Group Psychotherapy, Psychodrann €t
Soc io nrc t ry, 45(4), 139-1 48.
Mazor, R. (1982). Drama therapy for the elderly in a day care center. Hospital I
Community P sy chiat ry, 3 3, 577 -579.
Nordin, S. R. (1987). Psychodrama with the elderly. lounnl of Group Psychotherapy,
Psychodrama, & Sociometry, 40(D, 51,-61.
Remer, R., Morse, H. 8., Popma, J., & Jones, S. M. (1993). Spontaneity training and
psychodrama with Alzheimer's patients. Journol of Group Psyclrcthernpy,
Psychodrama & Sociometry, 45(4), 131-138.
Sandel, S. L., & fohnson D. R. (1987). Waiting nt the gate: Creatiaity and hope in tlrc
nursing ftonle. New York: Haworth.
Schloss, G. A. (1988). Growing old and growing: Psychodrama with the elderly.
In R. W. Maclennan, S. Saul, & M. B. Weiner (Eds.), Group psychotherapies for
the elderly (pp. 343-358). Madison CT: International Universities Press.
Telander, M., Quinlan, F., & Verson, K. (1987). Acting up! An innouatiue approach to
creatioe dranu for olcler adults. Morton Grove, IL: Coach House Press.
Weisberg, N., & Wilder, R. (Eds.). (1986). Drama with older ndults: Therapeutic inter-
ttentiorts. New Haven: National Association of Drama Therapists.
Wiener, R., & Traynor, J. (1988). The use of sociodrama in staff training in work-
ing with older people. Practice,l(4), 332-338.

A p p I i c' ct t i o t t s of P s1' c h o d ra rn q t i c M e I llocl s
O. Other Conditions
Callahan, M. L. (1989). Psychodrama and the treatment of bulimia. In L. M.
Hornyak & K. Baker'(Eds.), E-t1z'rrentinl tlrcrnlties for cnting disorders (pp.
101-120). New York: Guilford.
Corti, P., & Casson, J. (1990) Dramatherapy into psychodrama: An account of a
therapy group for women survivor.s of sexual abuse. Brilislr lournal of
P sy chod ran m, 5(2), 37 -53.
Hudgins, M. K. (1989). Experiencing the self through psychodrama and Sgstalt
-therapy in anorexia nervosa. In L. M. Harnyk & E. K. Baker (Eds.),
Exptciiintol thcrnpies for anting elisorders. New York: Guilford'
jay, S. (1992). Eating feelings: Working with women who have bulimia. Brilisir
lournnl of Psychodrnnra, 7 (2\, 5-'18.
Raaz, N., Carlson-Sabelli, L., & Sabelli, H. C. (1993). Psychodrama in the treaF
ment of multiple personality disorder: A process-theory perspective. In E. S.
Kluft (Ed.), Exprcssiz,a nnd functiotrol thernpi* in thc trantnrcnt ttf MPD (pp-
169-188). Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
143

9
Theoretical Issues
The practice of psychodrama is based on a rich complex of theo-
retical understandings, although these do not constitute a single,
separate theory as such. In fact, I challenge the appropriateness of
seeking a unified theory-as psychodynamic psychology attempt-
ed to do a generation ago, when psychotherapy was fragmented
into numerous major "schools of thought" and hundreds of minor
therapies. Instead, psychodrama should be recognized as being a
methodology which is embedded within an integrated field of
psychotherapy. In turn, psychotherapy is itself embedded within a
comprehensive, holistic view of psychology. This wider context
includes a number of fields which have their own understandings
and which can further the appreciation of the richness of the foun-
dations of psychodrama.
Although psychodrama does not have to be viewed as having a
separate theory, it nevertheless does have a number of core
themes. In these, it not only draws from the greater field of psy-
chology and psychotherapy, but also contributes to our views of
human nature.
METATH EORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Metatheory is theorizing about theory itself, and in this case, the
question is, should there be a special theory of psychodrama? My
answer, as noted earlier, is no. Indeed,l question the very tradition
of theory building that evolved within psychology in this century,
a tradition which tended to offer competitive systems rather than
144

Theoretical lssues
t4s
adding new understandings to an integrative general framework.
The historical and cultural trends which led to this misguided use
of the intellect arose from the confusion of the natures of the
behavioral sciences with the natural sciences, and ignored the
essential qualitative difference in the types of complexity involved
in the two types of science. A careful examination of this difference
goes beyond the scope of this chapter, but its conclusion is simply
that psychotherapists need to entertain a more fluid mode of theo-
rizing which can include different frames of reference.
Medicine, which involves hundreds of theories, all quite com-
patible, each addressing a particular dynamic in an incredibly
complex systems, presents an analogy. Medical theories are con-
stantly being elaborated, revised, and sometimes discarded and
replaced. Certainly they are not held as an ideology. Psychology
also addresses phenomena which involve many different levels of
organization and types of systems. Thus, psychotherapy should be
eclectic and integrative, addressing both neurophysiology on one
hand and social and cultural psychology on the other (Lazarus &
Beutler, 1992).
It is quite possible to formulate a person's problem and under-
stand many relevant dynamics without having to maintain an alle-
giance to any single theory. Some people's problems may be better
explained using certain ideas derived from Adler or Reich while
others' issues may be illuminated most effectively using ideas
taken from Jung or Freud.
Note that I am not suggesting that a psychotherapist become
atheoretical. That would be an abdication of the challenge of under-
standing at an abstract level, and of continuously developing the
complexity of one's model of human nature. Actually, I'm encour-
aging a truly professional and highly rigorous committment to
leaming and reading and creating one's own schema from many
sources. It is quite possible, but only with a willingness to relin-
quish one's hold on to a single explanatory schema. There isn't one
in medicine, and there doesn't need to be one in psychology.
From a multidimensional understanding of psychology, an
equally multimodal approach to treatment may be rationally for-

t46
Acting-ln
mulated. No one would want a physician who believed in using
only one type of treatment, excluding all others. Similarly, there
are times in working with patients when it is appropriate to meet
with the family, or in a group setting. At other times a change in
frequency or length of session might be indicated. Similarly, thera-
py may appropriately include various approaches, using action
some times, and simple discussion at others, depending on the
needs of the patient (Blatner, 1969-7970).
I NTERDIS CIPLINARY FOUN DATION S
To appreciate the depth and richness of psychodrama, one must
learn about many different associated activities. To begin with,
when used in a psychotherapeutic context, as mentioned above, its
application rests on the theory of psychotherapy itself, and the
rationale for a variety of treatment techniques. These, in turn, rest
on a foundation of understandings about the nature of learning,
conditioning, catharsis, conflict resolution, creativity, insight, the
influence of social networks and culture, the power of imagery and
language, and other fundamental dynamics in change, sickness,
and healing.
Since psychodrama most often is a group method, much of the
theory related to group therapy applies also to the management of
psychodrama groups. A good deal of psychoanalytic theory can be
used without having to also apply the classical analytic methods.
And the rich theories of Gestalt therapy, Transactional Analysis,
and many other approaches to group work also help explain why
psychodrama is a useful approach.
Beyond the group therapy literature, the understanding of
Broup dynamics as developed by many workers other than
Moreno, such as Kurt Lewin and pioneers in the fields of organi-
zational development, all add to the theory of psychodrama
(Moreno, 1953). It should be noted that simulations-whether
astronaut training or military war games an extension of the
basic ideas about role playing, and the theories associated with
skill development and problem solving also have relevance to the
issues discussed in this book.

Theoretical /.ssue,r
r47
Shifting to another source, in many ways the rationale for play
therapy *ith children also applies to the use of Psychodrama.
Theoiies on the nature of learning in children, theories of educa-
tion, and, especially, theories of experiential learning, such as
Richard Courtney's (1990, L995) work on drama in education are
part of this field. Beyond this is all the work that's been done on
ihe place of play and imagination not iust in child development,
but in adulthood, in old age, fot recreation, and as an important
element of culture itself (Blatner,1995; Blatner & Blatner, 1988).
These fields merge with another domain, the study of the more
complex sublimation of the play impulse in ritual and drama
(Fryba, 797l;Harmeling, 1950), Academic work has been done on
the dynamics of imagination, play, and symbolization in ritual
studies, a field that integrates anthropology, comparative religion,
mythology, art history and theater. And of course, the history of
thL theatre, and the extensive writings on the theoretical founda-
tions of drama therapy, all appty also to psychodrama.
Psychodrama is certainly an expressive therapy, and many ele-
menis in the theoretical bases of the other creative arts therapies-
the use of art, music, dance, movement, poetry, and drama in treat-
ment-also aPply to the understanding of how enactment in a
multidimensional, space-time Process can deepen and extend the
therapeutic process tremendously (Blatner,1992). Related, too, are
the theoretical justifications for the use of devices such as puppets,
masks, and videoplayback.
Psychodrama is a very social approach, not iust because it uses
other people and addresses the interpersonal field with more
methodological richness than any other type of treatment, but also
because its focus is as much on the social field as it is on individ-
ual psychodynamics. It is important to recognize that both the
depth and subtleties of individual experience and the complexities
of social interactions may be amply explored using psychodra-
matic methods. Thus, many of the theoretical foundations of social
psychology, role theory, the dramaturgical aPProach in sociology,
and applied or clinical sociology also support the rationale for the
use of action methods.
Certain contemporary trends in psychology and psychotherapy
also find a maior vehicle for implementation in psychodrama,

t48
Acting-ln
especially those of narrative psychology, constructivism, intersub-
jectivity, hermeneutics, personal mythology, feminist theory, and
other postmodern developments. Psychodramatic elements held
common with neurolinguistic programming, George Kelly,s ,'per-
sonal construct theory," and numerous other theoretical and prac-
tical systems have been noted in the current literature (Bonney &
Scott, 1983; Buchanan & Little, 1983).
A relevant bibliography of all these theoretical foundations of
psychodrama, then, would also need to include scores if not hun-
dreds of citations relating to each of these fields.
MORENIAN THEORY IN BRIEF
Having presented some considerations on metatheory and the
interdisciplinary connections which support the use of psychodra-
ma, let us return to a consideration of the essential ideas involved
in this approach. Psychchodrama may be understood most simply
in terms of the interaction of four basic ideas: creativity, spontane-
ity, playfulness, and drama.
Moreno noted that a significant dynamic in the problems of
individuals and groups with problems was a diminishing of cre-
ativity. And creativity cannot be forced-it generally doesn't arise
out of sitting and thinking about the problem. Rather, creative
breakthroughs come when people get involved, actively commu-
nicate, experiment. Experimentation, indeed, is the function of a
laboratory, and psychodrama may be considered a kind of social
psychological laboratory. Its various elements (as described in the
first chapter) are the living equivalent of the physical scientist's
glassware, chemicals, and electronic equipment (Moreno, 1956;
Kottler, 1994, p. 273'y.
ln this "laboratory," it is necessary to create the circumstances so
that if an "experiment" doesn't work, it doesn't blow up the labo-
ratory and kill all the people. The social equivalent to this safety
factor is the fail-safe context of play. Play is not to be thought of as
mere frivolity, the opposite of seriousness, but rather a special
frame of mind in which actions don't generate ultimate conse-
quences-in other words, the realm of pretend, Children naturally

Theoretical Issues
149
have a capacity for play, and adults sublimate this archetypal incli-
nation in the social institutions of ritual and drama. Psychodrama
harnesses this innate capacity in the service of healing.
In a safe context, then, people are invited to improvise, because
it is through spontaneity that creativity can best be generated. And
Moreno found that drann, that is, the enactment of problematical
situations, simulating or role playing them, offered a particularly
rich vehicle for exploring the attitudinal and emotional roots of
these problems and for finding more constructive alternatives.
Drama is unique in its capacity to integrate imagination and phys-
ical action with emotion, intuition, and reasoning, to provide an
experiential as well as intellectual way to learn and grow.
Furthermore, the various psychodramatic techniques may then be
understood as specific laboratory instruments for achieving a wide
range of goals. (ln this analogy, psychoanalysis might also be
viewed as being a kind of laboratory, only it has a much narrower
range of equipment and available procedures. And this analogy
can then be extended to offer a rationale for integrating psy-
chodramatic methods with other therapeutic approaches.)
ROLE DYNAMICS
Another theoretical foundation of psychodrama is Moreno's role
theory. Partly influenced by Moreno and also by a number of
other original thinkers in sociology and social psychology, social
role theory has also emerged as a sub-field which uses the role
concept for understanding human interactions. Moreno's special
contribution and insight is that people not only play many roles,
but also are capable of bringing a degree of self-reflection to the
process (Moreno, 1961). Further, this observing function itself is a
kind of "managing" meta-role which can be cultivated (Blatner,
1991\. Clayton (1994) and others in Australia use role theory in an
innovative fashion that helps people expand and work with their
identities.
I have gone a another step further and suggest that the nrle con-
cept, which was derived originally from the theater, may serve as
the basis for a practical language for applied individual and social

150
Acting-In
psychology and psychotherapy. ['ve systematized Morenian role
theory and named this general theoretical approach role dynamics.
Talking about problems and situations in terms of the roles being
played is very useful because the terminology is relatively familiar
and non-stigmatizing, that is, less suggestive of being viewed as
sick or abnormal. Furthermore, the language serves as a metaphor,
evoking images of events as interactions in a play (Blatner, 1988,
Chapter 10). This viewpoint then makes it easier to suggest that the
person mentally step back, think like a director or playwright, and
wonder how else the scene might be played. Role dynamics, then,
fosters an active and more creative type of imaginative thinking.
One of the more intriguing theoretical implications of role
dynamics is that the drive to expand the role repertoire may be rec-
ognized as being as fundamental a discovery of a motivating force
as Freud's identification of sexuality, Adler's noting the seeking of
a feeling of being effective, or Jung's proposed process of indiaidu-
ation-finding a holistic balance among the various aspects of the
psyche. This view rests on the observation that people operate
along many simultaneous dimensions of activity and cognition, or,
stated simply, people play many roles (Moreno, 1961).
Furthermore, from a role dynamics standpoint, psychopatholo-
gy reflects not only a distortion of one of these aspects of person-
ality, but often represents a compensatory expression of one facet
of the personality primarily due to a lack of development of anoth-
er. For example, a person with few creative opportunities, or little
validation for building skills in the realm of imagination and feel-
ings, tends to become overintellectualized. The intellectualization
is a aacuum actiaity (a term borrowed from ethology, referring to
the time- filling behavior of animals when their normal outlets are
frustrated, often by being in a cage).
Psychotherapy and education viewed from the position of role
theory would emphasize the training of the person's capacity in a
variety of roles that can balance and complement each other. The
normal function of play in childhood is to at least symbolically
enact a wide variety of roles that then become a core of identifica-
tions and ego strengths (Sarbin, 1943). For example, the child must
play at being a mother or father before he or she can convert inter-

Theoretical /sstre.r
151
nalized nurturing behaviors given by the Parents into an active
sense of nurturing others.
In addition to helping people have insight into the presence and
the nature of various complexes or parts of themselves which may
have remained out of immediate consciousness, psychodrama
offers ways to help them find more effective ways to play out their
lives in a more aware and matured fashion. The phases of this
process may include discovery, identification of the key attitudes,
clarification and renegotiation of the beliefs on which those atti-
tudes are based, remaking decisions, and practice of the new, more
finely discriminated or redirected attitudes.
EXPANSION OF THE ROLE REPERTOIRE
Psychodrama is more effective than simply verbal methods for
going through the process because it anchors the insights and emo-
tions in experience, in the more emotional, imaginal and intuitive
parts of the mind. Physical action generates a more experiential
and participatory type of learning, which makes it a vitalizing
component a total psychotherapeutic Program (Anzieu, 1984).
Some specific ways in which developing a wider role repertoire
may function are:
1. Tlrc sense of choice is increased, as there are more behavioral
roles with which one is familiar.
2. Thc intportance of nnny different ospects of life is validated
through role-taking behaviors. Dimensions such as play,
dance, achievement, competition, and imagination are val-
ued.
3. ldcntification. Practice in taking other roles builds an
increased capacity for empathy. Meerloo (1966) writes,
"Partaking in the psyche of the other means using the vic-
arious signs of preverbal communication. Moreno, the
founder of modern group therapy, calls this mutual partak-
ing and emotional communicative understanding from afar
' telic sensitivi ty' a nd' telic-recipr ocity."'

ls2
Acting-In
4. Experiencing the sense of self. Taking active and creatively
spontaneous roles in many dimensions fulfills an extreme-
ly important function: that of validating the sense of one's
own vitality, will, authenticity, feelings, imagery, and, in
short, the sense of being deeply alive, of being a "self ."
5. Flexibility. Role-taking behavior; if reinforced, helps people
to allow themselves to develop a sense of mastery in many
different role situations: father, lover, daughter, judge, stu-
dent, friend, teacher, police officer. In turn, the components
of each role can be applied more easily in new situations
where synthesis is required.
CONTRIBUTIONS TO PSYCHODYNAMICS
The theory implicit in psychodrama complements and enriches
the mainstream of theory in psychology and psychotherapy in a
variety of specific ways. The most unique aspects of psychodrama
are discussed in this section.
Vitality as a Core Dynamic. Excitement, interest, and vitality are
key emotional states, to be valued and promoted. These are among
the basic positive affects, and deserve their own explication, as has
been done for such affects as shame, anger, and fear. A corollary to
promoting positive affect is Moreno's orientation to "expanding
wellness" rather than merely attempting to directly counter the
symptoms of psychopathology.
Self-expression is recognized as being a very more important
process. The term replaces the negatively toned "exhibitionism,,,
which gives all artistic and dramatic productivity a suggestion of
frustrated sexuality. Psychodrama thus offers a specific methodol-
ogy which supports the implications of |ung's and Rank's theories
about art.
Creatiaity is itself given a central place in psychology, referring
not simply to art or science, but to the activities of everyday life, in
relationships, in societal institutions, and in personal and spiritual
development. The exercise of creativity is a cheerful and coura-
geous way of synthesizing the postmodernist, deconstructionist

Theoretical Issues
153
philosophy with the best of modernity and traditionalism
(McKissack,1992). Faced with the uncertainties that contemporary
global civilization generates, we are called on to dare to create a
better world in the face of being unable to rely on any fixed author-
ity. In their emphasis on creativity, the principles of psychodrama
also carry forth a constructivist and existentialist philosophy,
expressing in operationalized form the best insights of these
attempts to address the dilemmas of modern life.
A metaphor for self-reflecfron. The use of drama serves not only as
a technique, but more, as a metaphor which suggests an imagined
double role for people-as both the actor and the
playwright/director of their own life's dramas. This image makes
it easier for clients in psychotherapy or young people in the
process of learning to step back from their involvements and
reflect on their behavior and the assumptions which motivate
those reactions.
Thc itnportance of plny nnd spontaneity. Psychodrama supports
playfulness not only as a context for improvisation, but also as an
important dimension of vitality. The stand holding the urn with
Moreno's ashes has the inscription, "Here lies ttie man who
brought laughter and play back into psychiatry." Also, spontaneity
is recognized as an important quality which must be cultivated as
a deep skill and value in the soul. Like fung, Moreno intuited the
unconscious as not only being a repository for repressed and dis-
owned complexes of thoughts and feelings, but also a potential
source of wisdom and creativity. To mobilize its forces, plunging
forward in the activity of improvisation reflects a respect for and
receptivity to the deeper flows of images and insights. One of
Moreno's most significant insights was that the best way to foster
creativity was to promote spontaneity (Karp, 1994).
A ntetlrcd for enryathy. The idea of role reversal gives clients in
therapy and students in school a method for understanding others;
understanding proceeds not from mere exhortation but rather
from cultivating a skill that tends to draw people out of their men-
tal habits of egocentricity and promote a greater degree of Alfred
Adler's goal of "community feeling" (Adler, 1939). Most therapies
don't emphasize the importance of appreciating the other person's
viewpoint, but psychodrama places this procedure at the heart of

154
Acting-In
the method and as an important element in the theory of full heal-
ing.
A pluralistic model of personalify. The role theory implicit in psy-
chodrama suggests a view of the person as having many parts
within their self. Thus, it allows people to entertain their own
mixed and sometimes contradictory feelings without having to
feel abnormal. Authenticity often involves the expression of a
more complex reaction. The attempt to impose an artificially "con-
sistent" persona can be draining, and the expressing of the view-
points of several different roles can feel more genuine.
A more socially consciotts psychology. Psychodrama is a powerful
bridge between individual and social psychology and helps to
redirect people towards becoming conscious of their "social being-
ness." This again serves as a method for countering what Wallach
and Wallach (1983) called "psychology's sanction for selfishness."
Further, it is an approach which offers a wealth of component
ideas and techniques for exploring the interpersonal field, exam-
ining the nature of tele (Moreno's term for interpersonal prefer-
ence) as well as a number of other types of group dynamics, sub-
sumed under Moreno's general method of sociometry (Blatner,
1988, Chapters 12 & 13.)
Eaeryone in the group a cotherapisf. Moreno's approach to therapy
struggles against the natural tendencies to establish the director as
the sole authority and to redistribute the locus of healing among
all participants in the process. By learning the techniques, group
members are empowered to more actively guide the pursuit of the
group's task.
Imagination as a dimension of healinc. The concept of surplus reali-
fy invites people to appreciate the significance of the imaginal in
life, the psychological "truth" of what not only may have never
happened, but could never happen. Yet these events-a dialogue
with an ancestor or God, an encounter with an unborn child or
oneself in the past or future, a replaying of what would have been
the ideal transformation of a past event-if enacted with the wit-
nessing and consensual validation of others, have the potential to
be occasions for discovery and healing (Blomkvist & Rtitzel, 1994).
Catharsis as an agent of healing. Psychodrama is particularly help-
ful in evoking catharsis, which serves to anchor the protagonist

Theoretical Issues
155
experientially in a more conscious owning of previously repressed
feelings. This in turn allows him to more holistically introduce cor-
rective images and empowering experiences, to say, as if speaking
to the inner child , "Yes,l fully appreciate your pain and I can use
my present awareness to protect you from now on." Unless there
has been a real catharsis, the inner child won't believe superficial
reassurances, and will counter with, "You don't really know the
full extent of my feelings, so I can't really trust you." The dynam-
ics of catharsis were once an important part of therapy, but have
become generally eclipsed (Jackson, 1994). An understanding of
the function of catharsis is an important tool in the psychodrama-
tist's kit (Ginn, 1973; Kellermann, 1984; Blatner, 1985).
Addressing past, present, and future. Psychodramas may reenact
past events, explore future possibilities, and broaden awareness in
the here-and-now. Goals may be clarified and made more specific,
and-using the future projection technique-enacted, in order to
neutralize fears and rehearse required skills (Yablonsky, 1954).
And, as with Gestalt therapy, these methods may be used to
expand a sense of awareness and involvement in the present
moment.
Sociatry. Moreno also envisioned a broader view of the use of
psychodrama, one which included the entire society, offering
methods for intensifying involvement and expanding effective-
ness in a variety of contexts that went beyond the formal medical
model. He sought to revitalize the function of theatre so that it
serves to integrate peoPle within a community, adding to methods
for team and community building, making learning more relevant
and enjoyable in school, and fulfilling many Purposes.
FACILITATING PROBLEM-SOLVING
Whether in psychotherapy or a role-playing session in business or
education, whether in a group, family, or with an individual, there
are certain obvious stages in problem solving which may be facili-
tated by the use of psychodramatic methods.
Identifying the nature of the problem is often difficult if the peo-
ple involved tend to speak in terms of generalizations. Enactment

156 
Acfing-In
results in a much greater degree of specificity and also an oppor-
tunity to clarify the influence of the participants'nonverbal blhav-
iors.
Problems are usually related to implicit and possibly uncon-
scious assumptions or attitudes which need to be discovered and
brought into awareness. This is the heart of much that is written
about psychotherapy-but also is the object of organizational con-
sultations or even cultural criticism. Problem solving simply needs
to !1ke place at a deeper level. Psychodramatic methods aie espe-
{_ally helpful in bringing out the emotional levels of a problem.
Through dramatization, with the use of supportive doubling,
amplification and many other techniques, the protagonist is
enabled to engage the problem on an experiential as wefl is cogni-
tive level.
Yet for a true understanding of a problem, it is necessary for the
parties to consider the viewpoints and feelings of the other people
involved. Role reversal is a powerful method for helping peopre to
use their intuitive and imaginative capacity as a bridge to becom-
ing more empathic.
when all the factors affecting the situation have been crarified,
psychodramatic methods may then aid also in seeking more con-
structive solutions. Alternatives may be tried out, rehearsed, and
the effects of varying styles or approaches can be assessed. The
group setting is excellent for getting feedback, and a playful, sup-
portive context allows for a more spontaneous and creative level of
participation. From a behavioristic approach, effective responses
are modeled and when learned, reinforced, while ineffective adap-
tations become immediately apparent and are gradualy extin-
guished (Sturm, 1970). Further, the group's support provides a cor-
rective emotional experience.
INTEGRATION WITH OTHER PSYCHOTHERAPEUTIC
APPROACHES
As noted at the beginning of this chapter; I consider the various
theoretical systems of psychotherapy and their practical method-
ologies as being essentially compatible with each other. The differ-

Theoretical Issues
ts7
ent approaches address some facets of human exPerience more
than others, and so a flexible application of several different meth-
ods may be required in the individualized treatment of each case.
Without explicitly saying so, a number of other therapies
already utilize certain elements either historically derived from
psychodrama or developed independently, yet rely on some simi-
lar principles. The role playing used in assertion and social skills
training may be viewed as behavioristic, but is really no different
than what Moreno called "role training." Family therapists often
behave more like psychodrama directors than do traditional indi-
vidual or group therapists, and their techniques of "circular inter-
viewing," side taking, and family sculpture are further derivatives.
The guided imagery in psychosynthesis or other imagination ther-
apies are based on principles similar to those of psychodrama. I
encourage the concretization of imagined scenes in order to fur-
ther anchor their dynamics in experience. The activities of bioen-
ergeic analysis may often be used in coniunction with psychodra-
matic work, and other types of body therapies similarly are syner-
gistic. Albert Pesso's movement approach uses a method that is
very much like psychodrama (Pesso & Crandall, 1991).I discuss
this theme of integrations of psychodrama with other therapies in
greater depth in my Foundations of Psychodrarra (Blatner, 1988).
SUMMARY
Psychodrama is more of a praxis than a seParate school of thought
(Blatner, 1992). A praxis is a complex of both technique and the
principles which underlie their application. The theoretical foun-
dation of psychodrama is that it is a methodology which is best
understood within the context of a broader and more integrative
theory of therapy, and this in turn is to be viewed within the
greater context of a multidimensional psychology.
In keeping with his time, Moreno expounded his own theories
of psychodrama in an unsystematic fashion, and the result was
certainly incomplete. Bischof (19@) has an excellent review of
Moreno's wealth of valuable ideas. Over the last generation, many
have continued to develop and integrate Moreno's theoretical con-

l5g 
Acfing-ln
cepts with other aspects of the developing behavioral sciences.
This chapter suggests some of those more recent developments.
REFERENCES / RECOMMENDED READINGS
Adlea A. (1939). Social interest: A challengc to nmnkinel. New york: G. p. putnam,s
Sons.
Anzieu, Didier. (1984). Analytic psychodrama and physical exercises. lnThe group
and the unconscious (pp.43-57). (Translated from the French by B. Kilborne.)
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Bischof, L.L 0964). Moreno. ln,lnterprcting personality theories (pp.355-420). New
York: Harper & Row.
Blatner, A. (H. A.) (1969-70). Theoretical aspects of psychodrama--general com-
ments. B u I I e t i n d e P s y ch olo g i e, 2 3(13-1 6), 9SZ -9 68;.
Blatner, A. (1985). The dynamics of catharsis. lounml of Group psychothcrapy,
P sy chodra nm, & Socionrc t ry, 37 (4), 1ST -1 66.
Blatner, A. (1988). Founelatiotts of psychodrnnm: History, theory, and practice. New
York: Springer.
Blatner, A. (1991). Role dynamics: A comprehensive theory of psychology. lounnl
of Group Psychotherapy, Psychodrann' {r Sociometry, 44i\,5H0.
Blatnet A. 0992). Theoretical principles underlying creative arts therapies. Tftc
Ar ts itt Psychotherapy, 1 8(4), 405409.
Blatner, A. (1995). Drama in education as mental hygiene: A child psychiatrist's
perspective. Youth Theat re lournol, 9, 92-96.
Blatner, A., & Blatner, A. (1988). The art of play: An adults' gnide to imagination and
sponlaneity. New York: Human Sciences press.
Blomkvist, L. D., & Riitzel, T. (1994). Surplus reality and beyond. In p. Holmes, M.
Karp, & M. Wqlson!Eds.), Psychodrama since i4oreno: lnnoaations in theory antl
p rac t i c e (pp. 235-257). London: Routled ge.
Bonney, W. C., and Scott, K. H. (1983). An exploration of the origin of role forma-
tion.via psychodrama and personal construct theories. /ournal of Group
P sy c h o t h e r apy, P s y ch o d r a n w, €t S o c io m e t r y, 3 6(2), 4Z -54.
Buchanan, D. R., and Little, D. (1983). Neuro-linguistic programming and psy-
chodrama: Theroretical and clinical similariti-es. - lournal "of Groip
Psychothernpy, Psychodranm, €t Soc ionret ry, 36(3), ll4-122.
Clayto-n, M. (1994). Role theory and its applications in clinical practice. In p.
Holmes, M. Karp, & M. Watson (Eds.), Psycftodranw since Moreno: lnnooations
in theory atd practice (pp. l2l-1aa). London: Routledge.
Courtney, R. (1990). Dranm and intelligence: A cttgnitiue tfteory. Montreal: McGill-
Queen's University Press.

Theoretical Issues
159
Courtney, R. (1995). Dronn nntl feeling: An aesthetic lllcory. Montreal: McGill-
Queen's University Press.
Fryba, M. (1972). Psychodrama elements in psychosis treatment by shamans of Sri
Lanka. In M.-Pines & L. Rafaelsen (Eds.), Tlre indioidual and the group:
Bounrlnries antl intarrclotiotrs: Vol. 2' Practica (pp. 333-339). New York:
Plenum.
Cinn, I.B. (1973). Catharsis: lts occurrence in Aristotle, psychodrama, and psy-
choana lysis. G ro u1t P stlchttt hc ra py & P sy ch od rn n n, 26(2), 7 -22'
Greenberg, I., and Bassin, A. (1976'). Reality therapy and psychodrama. In A'
Bass'in, T. Bratter, and R. Rachin (Eds.), Tlrc raality thcrnpy render (pp'
231-240). New York: Harper & Row.
Harmeling, P. c. (1950). Therapeutic theatre of Alaska Eskimos. Grorrp
P sy chot hc rnpy, 3(l -Z), 7 4-7 5.
Jackson, s. w. (1994). Catharsis and abreaction in the history of psychological
healing. Psychintric Clirrics ry' Nr.rrth Anrcrica, 17(3\, 471491.
Jacobs, A. (1977). Psychodrama and TA. ln M. James (Ed.),Techniqucs in transac-
tiunl onolysis'for llrcrrtpisls ond counsr:/ors (pp. 239-2491. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley.
Karp, M. (1994). Spontaneity and creativity: The river of freedom. In P. Holmes,
M. Karp. & M. Watson (Eds.), Psycfurtdronn sincc Mttrano: lnnoootitttrs in tlrco'
n1 nnd pructicc (pp. 39-60). London: Routledge.
Kellermann, P. F. (1984). The place of catharsis in psychodrama. lournal of Crtwp
P sy cl r ttt hc rn1ty, P sycl nul r n n n €t Soc ittn r a t r 11, 3/(l ), 1 -l 3.
Kelly, c. R. (1982). Theoretical applications of symbrrlic interactionism and psy-
'chodrama. 
Jourtrol of Groult Psqchotharalty, Pstlclutdranm, & Socionrctry, 35(1),
39-45.
Kottler, J.A. (1994). Athurtr.:".tl grttrry lcnduship. t'acific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Landy, R. (1990). The concept of role in drama tlrerapy. Tlrc Arts in Psycltotlu,rnPy,
17,223-230.
Lazarus, A. A., & Betrtler, L. E. (1992). The future of technical eclecticism.
P sy cl tttt l u'rtrprl : T l rco r y, Rcscnrc/r, P rnc t i ct', Trn i n i n g, 29( 1 ), 1 1 -1 8.
McKissack, l. (Decernber 1992). Psychodrama in the postmodern world.
Austrnlinn & Ncil Zcnlottd Pstlclndrnnm Assocrrtlrirrr lournnl, '|.,27-30.
Meerloo, J.A.M. (1966). Why do we sympathize with each other? Archiucs ttf
Gaucrnl Psychitt n1, 1 5, 390-397.
Moreno, ,. L. (1953). How Ktrrt Lewirr's "Research Center for Group Dynamics"
started. Socittutd rV, 16(l ), 101-104'
Moreno, J. L. (1956). Psychotherapy: Preserrt and future. In, F. Fromm-Reichmann
& I. L. Moreno (Eds.), Pnr,qrcss irr ;rsrTcftolltcrnytv Yol. 1 (pp.327-333). New
York: Grune and Strattorr.

160 
Acfing-In
Moreno, J. L. (1961). The role concept: A bridge between psychiatry and sociolo-
gy. American lournal of Psychiatry, 118,51U523.
Naac R. (1977). A psychodramatic intervention with a T.A. framework in indi-
vidual and group psychotherapy. Group psychotherapy, psychodrann [t
Sociome t ry,, 30, 127 -1Y.
orcutt, T. L- 09n). Roles and rules: The kinship and territoriality of psychodra-
ma and Gestalt therapy. Group Psychotherapy, psychodrama, & Soiioinetry, SO,
97-107.
Pesso, A., & Crandall, f. (Eds.). (1991). Moaing psychotherapy. Cambridge, MA:
Brookline.
Sarbin, T. R. (1943). The concept of role-taking. Sociometry, 6,223-ZBS.
Seeman, H. (1982). A methodology for existential psychotherapy: Psychodrama.
I ou r n al of G rou p P sy cho t he r a py, P sy chod r a n u, & Sioc ionrct ry, 
-3 
S(2), ZH2.
Shearon, E. M. (1978). Aspects of persuasion in psychodrama. Group
Psychotherapy, Psychodrama, & Sociontetry, 31, 9G1,08.'
Shearon, E. M. (1981). Comparison of Rogers' self theory and Moreno's spon-
taneity_theory. lournal of Group Psychotherapy, Psychodrama, & Sociometry, j4,
112-133.
Sturm, I. E. (1970). A behavioral outline of psychodrama. psyclrotherapy: Theory,
Research and Pract ice, 7(4), 245-247.
wallach, M.A., & wallach,-L. (1983-). Psychology's sanction for selfishness: The error of
egoism in theory and therapy. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman & Co.
Worell, J., & Remer, P. (1992). Fentinist perspectiaes in therapy: An erupowernrent
model for ?oomen. New York: Wiley.
Whitmont, E. C. (1984). Recent influences on the practice of fungian analysis. In
M. Stein (Ed.),lungian Analysis (pp.yG 360). Boulder, CO: Shambhila.
Yablonsly,^L. (1954). The future-projection technique. Group psychotherapy, 7,
30!305.

L0
The Tiaining of the
Psychodramatist
Directing psychodrama requires a substantial degree of training,
because the method is powerful-and, in untrained hands, poten-
tially dangerous. It may be likened to surgery in that its practice
requires both mastery of a specialized technique and grounding in
a broader professional knowledge. Kellermann (1992b) points out
that a director needs to be competent as an understanding analyst,
a healing therapist, an aesthetic dramatic producer, and a flexible
group leader. In turn, these four roles involve a further variety of
more specific abilities.
In conducting classical psychodrama, directors must be dis-
criminating in selecting protagonists, and as with surgery, must
make sure the setting is supportive and the psychosocial equiva-
lent of a recovery room is available (as is discussed more fully in
the chapter on pitfalls). On the other hand, a number of psy-
chodramatic techniques, such as role reversal, may be integrated
into many types of therapy, and their application may be likened
to the use of minor surgical techniques which are part of any fam-
ily practitioner's practice.
Directing psychodrama requires more than mere knowledge of
the techniques. One of the problems in any field is the fact that
there are many people who claim a level of competence that they
do not in fact have. Also, it is not apparent to the general popula-
tion (or to a good many therapists) exactly what psychodrama con-
sists of. Many self-proclaimed directors have assembled a grab-
bag of structured experiences, creative drama or theatre Sames
l6l

t62
Actittg-ln
techniques and other active exercises which they then call "psy-
chodrama." Others have attended one or a few workshops and,
under the illusion that directing seems simple enough, introduce
the method in their groups. However, all too often these novices
don't know how to manage the powerful emotions that are
evoked. The recipients of this treatment in turn blame and deval-
ue the psychodramatic method itself rather than the overreaching
of the group leader.
Unless the appropriate standards for directing are widely
known, consumers often cannot discriminate the well-trained
practitioner from the amateur. Unfortunately, professionals are
often tempted to think that the mere possession of a degree allows
them to engage in practices which are, in fact, beyond their actual
competence. And since psychodrama can seem to be easy from the
point of view of some naive audience members, they may feel safe
in presuming that they can direct also.
Becoming a psychodramatist is far more demanding than it
might appear, because it requires a mastery of personal and pro-
fessional abilities:
. psychodramatic techniques as described in this book
. experience directing under supervision and revising one's
approach with appropriate feedback
. development of personal spontaneity, authenticity, open-
ness, creative flexibility, humility, responsibility, and caring
. well-grounded knowledge of the principles of human devel-
opment throughout the life cycle, varieties of psychosocial
problems (psychopathology), methods of diagnosis, and an
appreciation of the full range of available treatment
approaches
. appreciation of group dynamics, including Moreno's own
method of sociometry whereby people can be helped to give
themselves feedback in groups regarding patterns of attrac-
tion and repulsion

Training of the Pstchoelnunatist
163
. understanding of the principles underlying psychotheraPy
. appreciation of drama that includes recognition of the power
of its methodology, and aesthetic sensibility regarding stag-
ing, ritual, and timing
r understanding of and commitment to the ethics of therapy
and group leadership
. dedication to a philosophy of creativity, spontaneity, and
encounter which includes the spiritual dimensions of life
For these reasons, psychodrama should be recognized as being
as complex a subspecialty of psychotheraPy as neurosurgery is a
subspecialty of medicine. Those who wish to do more than inte-
grate some of these techniques into their own practice should real-
ize that a commitment to several hundred hours of further training
may be demanded.
CERTIFIED TRAINING
The field of psychodrama has become professionalized, which
means that its recognized practitioners have dedicated themselves
to an ongoing development of their abilities and knowledge. Like
most professions, it has established standards for differentiating
those who have fulfilled a recognized course of training from those
whose "expertise" is merely self-proclaimed. Thus, in the mid-
1970s the American Board of Examiners in Psychodrama,
Sociometry and Group Psychotherapy and was formed and estab-
lished two levels of competence: Certified Practitioner (CP) and
Trainer, Educator & Practitioner (TEP). Certified Practitioners are
recognized as being capable of directing psychodrama at any
degree of depth; TEPs are recognized as capable of teaching others
to direct psychodramas.
The board has developed criteria for certification, has estab-
lished examination procedures, and makes available materials
which explain these requirements. For those interested in pursuing
subspecialty training in psychodrama, please write:

t64
Acting-ln
The American Board of Examiners in Psychodrama,
Sociometry and Group Psychotherapy
P.O. Box 15572
Washington, DC 20003-0572
Telephone: (202) 483-0514
As a psychotherapeutic specialty, psychodrama requires first
that a certified practitioner complete a program of training in one
of the recognized fields of psychotherapy-psychiatry, psycholo-
gy, social work, psychiatric nursing, or counseling, obtaining at
least a Master's degree. The prerequisite training should provide a
basic knowledge of diagnosis and treatment, although it is expect-
ed that psychodramatists will continue to engage in an ongoing
process of professional and personal self- improvement.
The board also makes available a directory of certified profes-
sionals, so practitioners can more easily be located. As of this writ-
ing, there are over a hundred certified trainers (TEPs) and over
two hundred certified practitioners in the USA, and a number in
other countries who have been certified by the American board.
Psychodrama is becoming widespread internationally, with an
estimated ten thousand practitioners and perhaps one thousand
trainers. There are over twenty other national organizations of psy-
chodramatists and less-organized networks of professionals in
many other countries. Some of these organizations have established
their own accreditation procedures. However, arrangements
regarding reciprocity of certification are still being negotiated.
In the United States, the American Society for Group
Psychotherapy and Psychodrama (also known as ASGPP) is the
organization founded by Moreno himself. The ASGPP now holds
national and regional conferences, provides a subscription to a
national journal, the lournal of Group Psychotherapy, Psychodrama €t
Socionrctry, and offers a number of other membership benefits.
For information regarding conferences, help in networking with
practitioners in your area (or country, if you are outside of the
United States), write:

Truining of the Psychodranmtist
165
The American Society for Group
Psychotherapy & Psychodrama
6728 Old Mclean Village Drive
Mclean, VA 22101
Telephone: (7 03) 556-9222
The ASGPP, incidentally, was the first organization of grouP
psychotherapists, established in1942, some few months before the
American Group Psychotherapy Association (AGPA) was estab-
lished by Samuel Slavson, a psychoanalytically-oriented SrouP
worker who was a rival of Moreno's. Because psychoanalysis
established a hegemony among the psychotherapies during the
middle of this century, the AGPA became the more widely known
of the two organizations. But in the last decade, it has expanded
beyond the boundaries of psychoanalysis and included rePresen-
tatives from family therapy, gestalt therapy and psychodrama as
part of its annual programs.
Moreno was also the founder of the Intemational Association
for Group Psychotherapy (IAGP)-the first international group
therapy organization-which hosts an annual meeting every three
years. It has subgroups of analytic, psychodramatic, and other
types of approaches. Information regarding membership may be
obtained by writing the cochairperson for the section on psy-
chodrama: David Kipper, PhD, Action Methods Associates, Ltd.,
444 N. Michigan Ave., Suite 810, Chicago, IL 60611, or Grete Leutz,
M.D., Moreno Institut, Uhlandstrasse 8, Uberlingen/Bodensee
D88662, Germany.
THE ELEMENTS OF TRAINING
Learning to direct psychodrama involves both didactic and exPe-
riential components. Much of the rest of this chapter will primari-
ly discuss training for those who would apply psychodrama as a
therapeutic method. However, for those who wish to use psy-
chodrama in nontherapeutic contexts, modifying it as role playing

t66
Acting-ln
or sociodrama, adequate training-and caution-are still neces-
sary. In using role playing in the classroom or in a business, the
director needs to know how to develop and sustain the warming-
up process. Knowing psychodramatic methods alone, however,
can't make a person a competent teacher, group leader, or organi-
zational consultant. Each of these roles has its own set of basic
skills to which the knowledge of psychodrama can serve as a com-
plement.
In addition to the information in this book, the reader is urged to
seek out other descriptions of techniques and further theoretical dis-
cussions. Many books and articles in the field are listed listed in the
bibliography at the end of this volume. I wrote Foundations of
Psychodramc (1988) as a complement to this present book. It address-
es in greater depth a number of psychodrama's underlying princi-
ples and ways to integrate psychodrama with various theories.
The elements of training that will be discussed include experi-
ential learning, personal development, group dynamics, spontane-
ity training, role expansion, and associated approaches.
Experiential Learning
The learning of psychodrama requires a knack-that is, an inte-
gration of intuition, emotion, imagination, rational cognition, and
physical activity-which can only be acquired through a process of
holistic involvement. A student of psychodrama must experience
the process in all available roles: auxiliary ego, audience, director,
and especially, protagonist. In this respect the leaming is more like
the training of a psychoanalyst than the training of a surgeon. Only
through the repeated experience of being the protagonist can a
person learn some of the nuances of feeling which then develop
the requisite sensitivity in a would-be director.
Training in psychodrama is primarily experiential, with an over-
lay of didactic instruction and adjunctive reading. Students begin
to direct small enactments and circumscribed role-playing activi-
ties under supervision as soon as they are able. Also, they are
encouraged to introduce psychodramatic methods as comple-

Training of the Psvchodrunati.st
ments to their other activities as therapists in individual, family, or
group treatment (Stein & Callahan ,'1982). Just as clients in therapy
must engage a kind of risk taking in order to relearn new lessons
and skills in life, so, too, must therapists have a sense of adventure
in acquiring the skills of directing. The sense of competence is,like
true insight, a "felt sense," achieved through an integrated process
in which bodily experience, muscular action, feeling pulled or
pushed, the actual "doing" of self-expression (as differentiated
from merely talking about it, or even vividly imagining it), all
deepen the shift in cognition.
In the course of training, there are a number of ways that the
student of psychodrama can be aided by the teacher (Goldman,
Morrison & Schramski,7982; Nolte & Hale, 7976). Theories of psy-
chodrama can help the apprentice director bring out the grouP's
main concern and relate it to the work of the protagonist
(Buchanan, 1980). But perhaps the most important experience is
working under supervision. Students benefit greatly from having
an opportunity to "process" what has been done as a director with
a trainer. Kellermann (1992a) reviews the various issues which
must be addressed in this type of pedagogic debriefing.
Anyone who wishes to achieve competence in directing must
develop a willingness to take risks-the risks of being a protago-
nist repeatedly, speaking up in the grouP, daring to critique
authority, affirming individual inclinations, and especially to
direct imperfectly and be the recipient of criticism-and in so
doing, exercise the more demanding dimensions of spontaneity.
Becoming a protagonist not only provides a powerful experience
of therapy, but it also helps to sensitize the student to the role of
the patient in psychodrama. The future director learns from the
inside, so to speak, which of the acting director's maneuvers are
most helpful, and which are most distracting and/or misleading.
The student identifies with and internalizes the helpful behaviors,
learning through modeling by the trainer even from within the
quasi-hypnotic experience of enactment.
t67

168
Acting-In
Personal Deaelopment
It must be acknowledged that every professional, every trainer,
every practioner continues to struggle with challenges. Most pro-
fessionals in training (and ever after) continue to address and
work through at least some degree of residual reaction patterns
based on previous family experiences, friendship and primary
romantic relationships, continuing frictions with parents, partners,
co-workers, and children, spiritual conflicts, dealing with addic-
tive tendencies, self-management, life planning, role balance, and
other issues. I am not implying that only those who have fully
resolved all life issues should dare to direct a psychodrama. I
doubt that any of us ever reach that possibly illusory endpoint.
However, directing does require the achievement of psychological-
mindedness, insight, and openness to evaluating least a fair pro-
portion of one's own weaknesses. If blocks occur, then, the direc-
tor can at least consider that they may be expressions of his or her
own psychodynamic "blind spots," and will not be too proud or
defensive to ask for help or consultation.
A basic principle for the practice of psychotherapy is that thera-
pists must become alert to the way their own problems can inter-
fere with their helping of others. Directors of psychodrama,
whether in training or fully certified, must keep in mind the
inevitability of encountering situations that "push their buttons,"
evoke what in psychoanalysis is generally called countertransfer-
ences, subconscious reaction patterns that can block optimal work
with a protagonist.
Perhaps the best way to learn to help others is to become famil-
iar with the process of self-discovery, which involves learning how
to become sensitive to one's own tendencies to error. Direction can
be flawed by patterns of misinterpretation of others' behaviors;
limitations of possible responses; false beliefs about oneself, oth-
ers, the nature of life, or the best way to cope with the world; ten-
dencies to bias or distortion regarding certain situations or ideas;
unconscious reaction patterns to certain people; and so forth. The
student of psychodrama, like any therapist, must become aware of

Tra in i n g oJ' t he P sychod ramat i.s t
t69
his or her transferences, or proclivities to react not to who the other
person really is, but rather to a person whose image or memory is
evoked by the other person. These distortions must be cleared
through the sometimes painful process of personal therapeutic
exploration.
Students of psychodrama who are not seeing a psychotherapist
to explore their own personal issues should at least participate in
an ongoing series of personal growth experiences. The PurPose
should include not only the correction of personality traits that
might interfere with the practice of psychotherapy, but equally
important, the acquisition of some strategies and a motivation to
continue one's own self-reflective adventure on a lifelong basis.
Group Dynamics
Being part of a Broup, whether it be an actual therapy grouP, a Per-
sonal growth group, or a training grouP, offers opportunities to
learn about one's own interpersonal interactions and, at an experi-
ential level, one also learns about a number of Moreno's principles
of sociometry. Often the ongoing dynamics of the group's interac-
tion will be more relevant to the learning of each participant than
observing or participating in a protagonist-centered classical psy-
chodrama. And using psychodramatic methods such as doubling
and role reversal to address group phenomena can deepen the
experience tremendously.
Learning experientially and didactically can be synergistic.
Ancillary reading of books and articles on group process (e.9.,
Corey & Corey 119921, Ettin [19921, or Nicholas [1984]is highly rec-
ommended. It's also helpful to get involved in some task-oriented
groups in which the challenge goes beyond mere insight. Much
can be learned about oneself and group dynamics through events
which involve taking responsibility, delegating authority, manag-
ing, dealing with disappointments, learning to give and receive
constructive criticism, allowing oneself to be vulnerable, and other
interpersonal challenges in group endeavors.

170
Acting-ln
Spontaneity Training
The capacity to warm oneself up to spontaneity is an important
skill in directing psychodrama. The director must become open
and receptive to inspiration, intuition, and creativity. This requires
practice, as much as any other skill. Most people are somewhat
inhibited, timid and stilted, and learning how to counter the sub-
tle and often not-so-subtle conditioning of a culture that generally
feels threatened by spontaneity. Teaching and preaching, selling
and mediating, shifting between the confident helper and the
humble student are all components of the psychodrama director's
role. Initiative, comfort in taking charge, and the ability to project
one's voice can be cultivated.
The kinds of activities that promote spontaneity development
include theatre games, the kinds of warm-ups described in
Chapter 4 or in the books and articles in the references of that
chapter, and the activities described inThe Art of P/ay, (Blatner &
Blatner, 1988). Also, the activities associated with the other creative
arts therapies are often spontaneity based, and invite an expansion
of roles into new territories.
Role Expansion
A related mode of learning involves the student's development of
role-taking skills in general. The basic idea is to learn to think like
an actor rather than a textbook, to exert the "muscles of imagina-
tion" in wondering what it might be like to be in another person's
situation. Actually enacting those unfamiliar roles becomes a pow-
erful exercise which builds empathy and understanding (Blatner,
1985a; Blatner & Blatner, 1988). Role-taking skills grow with prac-
tice, and that practice can often be structured so that it's playful
and fun.
Directors must also appreciate the depth and variety of dynam-
ic and social issues which affect minorities and other subgroups
whose life situation hasn't become part of the general cultural
awareness. Some therapists deal with addicts, criminals, the home-
less, the elderly, the terminally ill, people who are HIV positive or
with AIDS, and and part of their training should then include the

Traitting of the Psvchodrcunatist
exploration of roles which many feel abhorrent or frightening. Yet
this kind of role-taking also helps trainees reconnect with what
fungians call the shadoru contplexes, those dynamics which have
been most rejected and possibly even repressed as "not-me." This
kind of work, thus, not only is personally therapeutic, but helps to
sensitize directors to themes which might otherwise cause "blind
spots" or countertransferences (Blatner, 1985a).
I have found it especially helpful to become familiar with the
varieties of self-deception and interpersonal manipulations. The
different defense nrcclmnisnts, as they are called in psychoanalysis,
can be appreciated as inner dramatic maneuvers, little subiective
performances which serve to restore the individual's sense of con-
trol or self-esteem. Don't just learn them from the textbooks, but
role play these avoidant techniques. They are subconscious, magi-
cal, somewhat primitive forms of thinking which can be expressed
not only in descriptive prose, but also in the form of dialogue-the
language of the self-system discussed in Chapter 3. In fact, these
cognitive transformations are often performed on a preverbal or
nonverbal level, but they nevertheless have a verbal equivalent. A
sullen withdrawal may have no conscious equivalent, but it func-
tions ns r/to say, "l'm not going to budge. You should reach out to
me," or "Leave me alone, everything you do iust makes me feel
worse."
Learn also how these stances catl be expressed in bodily pos-
tures, character styles, and even through the clich6s and norms of
the culture. These constitute a great portion of the "hidden" levels
of feeling and communication. This knowledge may be used by
auxiliaries in the role of double to portray the deeper truths which
in real life too often remain unspoken and thus inaccessible to
reevaluation and healing.
Re I atc d Therapeutic Appro ach e s
Beyond le'arning a basic approach to psychotherapy, which
includes the acquisition of an appreciation for the fundamentals
of psychodynamic theory, psychosocial development, diagnosis,
psychopathology, and at least one mainstream method of treat-
l7t

172
Acting-In
ment, it is also helpful for a student of psychodrama to learn
about those therapeutic approaches that are particularly related to
psychodrama.
From the 1950s through the 1970s, group psychotherapy was
dominated by the hegemony of psychoanalysis, but gradually,
since the mid-1960s, alternative approaches, some of which have
been influenced directly or indirectly by Moreno's ideas, have
gained recognition. During the 1980s, there have been increasing
interconnections between mainstream group psychotherapy and
psychodrama. This point deserves emphasis: There is a great
potential for the integration of psychodramatic methods and prin-
ciples with other approaches. Knowing about Morenian approach-
es can deepen, intensify and complement psychodynamic group
work and in turn, the practice of psychodrama can be enriched by
the best insights of the various other innovators in the psychody-
namic approaches. Cross-fertilization is especially productive in
the subfields discussed below.
Conjoint family therapy has been a natural area of complementar-
ity. Most family therapists behave in a fashion. that is closer to a
psychodrama director than do most group therapists. One of the
reason this book's title uses the term, "psychodramatic methods"
rather than "psychodrama" is that I want to counter the clich6 that
psychodrama is necessarily a "group" approach. It may be that the
modification and applications of Morenian techniques will occur
in more active and intensive work with families, couples, and even
individuals
Furthermore, the systems orientation of family therapy theory is
a mode of thought similar to Moreno's sociometric ideas. And this
approach extends beyond simple family dynamics to include mul-
tiple generations, extended family, friends and neighbors, relevant
social agencies, and other areas in the social network.
Humanistic and existential approaches to psychotherapy share
some important viewpoints with Morenean thought and should be
included in the development of an overall perspective toward psy-
chology (Seeman, 1,982).
The cogn it iue therapies, including cognitive-behavioral therapy
and some related forms, such as Albert Ellis' rational- emotiae th-er-
apy, involve the process of reviewing beliefs and modes of think-

Tra i n i n g <tf t h e P s 1'chod rama t i.s t
t73
ing. Cognitive and cognitive behavioral therapies, developed
mainly in the 1970s by Aaron Beck and others, is becoming one of
the fastest-growing general modalities in therapy in the 1990s
(Beck, 1995). Knowing about these approaches can help psy-
chodramatists to better deal with their protagonists'beliefs, as dis-
cussed in the chapter on action.
Another related modality in psychotheraPy is the utilization of
the power of imagery and visualization. This capacity has become
recognized as a vehicle for accessing the emotions and reactions of
the preverbal psychological functions. Furthermore, the theory
underlying these so-called right brain therapies also bolsters the
rationale for psychodrama, which, as I like to emphasize, inte-
grates imagination as well as action.
The creatiae arts therapies also utilize the patients' imagery, and
add to imagery self-expression in aesthetic forms which becomes a
form of sublimation and emPowerment even as it is helping the
conscious mind to understand deeper and more subtle dimensions
of feeling (Blatner, 1957). Art, music, dance, poetry, and a variety
of drama therapy techniques are all potentially powerful sources
for expanding the psychodramatist's repertoire. The techniques
involved serve as natural vehicles for both the warming-up and
integration (see Creamer, 1983, and especially McNiff, 1985).
Gestalt therapy was methodologically derived in part from psy-
chodrama, especially regarding the use of the technique of the
empty chair. This rich approach invites an existential and vivid
way to access the realm of awareness in the present moment. It is
one of the most important complements to the use of psychodra-
ma, and many practitioners freely synthesize both methods.
The body therapics recognize the importance of the muscular pat-
terns of tension and habitual usage. Bioenergetic analysis,
Alexander Lowen's derivative of Wilhelm Reich's early ideas
about character and "body armoring," is perhaps the best known
of these approaches (Lowen, 1995). Yet there are elements of this
concept in Gestalt therapy and other active treatment methods.
Some bioenergetic techniques can be adapted to help patients deal
with blocked emotions during psychodramatic explorations.
Working with nonverbal communications is an important
dimension of psychodrama. In order to bring out the unsPoken

t74
Acting-In
expressions of emotion, however, the practitioner must first be
sensitive to the wide variety of ways that people knowingly or
(more often) unknowingly give each other messages. Related also
is a knowledge of patterns of verbal communications, the fields of
practical semantics and linguistics that can help the student to
understand the common problems of miscommunication that are
so prevalent in pathological family interactions (Blatner, 1985b).
In addition, the student of psychodrama and psychotherapy
should leam about those fields related to psychodrama theoreti-
cally: drama therapy, drama in education, constructivism, femi-
nism, and others (see Chapter 9). And finally, the psychodramatist
should be conversant with current cultural issues and the stresses
of our changing world. Issues related to shifting patterns in rela-
tions between the sexes, relations with parents and children, the
nature of success and philosophies of life, the spiritual journey and
religious crises, challenges in educational and vocational choices-
these and many other themes are evolving along with new forms
of technology and socioeconomic organizationi. poritical issues
relating to ecology, human rights, and the arms race are also fac-
tors of increasing relevance to people's lives, and these ,,sociodra-
matic" issues often lead to meaningful psychodramas regarding
personal values and choices.
It must be emphasized that there are many occasions in which
psychodrama or action approaches are irrelevant or even con-
traindicated. The freedom to refrain from doing drama is as impor-
tant as the not infrequent and highly desirable surgeon's consrlta-
tion at which it is decided that an operation is not indicated.
Psychodrama should be viewed as an optional set of tools, not a
single approach for all patients.
For example, psychodramatists, as psychotherapists, should
become familiar with the current general status of biologicar psy-
chiatry, that is, the indications and benefits (as well as the limita-
tions and side effects) of the latest psychotropic medications,
which are as much a part of a comprehensive treatment as antibi-
otics. There are many situations in which they are not needed-
and indeed, times when they're overprescribed-but a competent
therapist is able to use-via referral when necessary-all modes of
treatment.

Training of the Psychodramatisl
SUMMARY
The student of psychodrama must balance several aspects of
learning:
1. the knowledge that comes with reading and classroom work
2. the understanding that comes with experiencing a variety of
situations through the exercise of role reversal, as auxiliary,
as protagonist, and simPlY in PlaY
3. the competence thatcomes with practice to the point of mas-
terY
4. the wisdom that comes from integrating into the learning
process one's own personal therapeutic iourney, and con-
iists of the growing capacity to liberate and access one's
own higher self.
REFERENCES / RECOMMENDED READINGS
Beck, A. T., & Weishaar, M. E. (1995). Cognitive therapy. In R. J' Corsini & D'
wedding (Eds.), Currcr t psychothcraprts (5th ed.) (pP. 229-261).ltasca, IL: F.
E. Peacock.
Blatner, A. (1985a). Further role explorations. In Role Dewlopnrcnt (pp.5F58). San
Marcos, TX: Author.
Blatner, A. (1985b). Becoming aware of nonverbal communication. ln Rolt'
Dcoclopnrcnt (pp. a7-5$. San Marcos, TX: Author.
Blatnec A. (1987). The function of the creative therapies-A preface' In M' R'
Morrison (Ed.), Poclry ns thcrapy (pp. 17-191. New York: Human Sciences
Press.
Blatner, A., & Blatner, A. (1988). Thc art of play: An adult's guide to rcclainring inng-
ination and spontoneity. New York: Human Sciences Press.
Buchanan, D. R. (1980). The central concern model: A framework for structuring
psychodramatic pnrduction . Group Psttchothcrapy, Psychodranm, S socionrctrv,
33,47-{,2.
Corey, M. S., & Corey, G. (1992). Groups: Proccss nntl prnctice' (4th ed')' Pacific
Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Creamer, N. (1983). The silent language: Basic principles of movement/dance
therapy for the non-movement therapist. lournnl of Group Psycholhcrapv,
Psychotlrann €t Socionrctrrl, 36(2), 5}{0.
t7s

176 
Acting-In
Ellis, A. (1979). Rational-emoliyg !!:tupv. In R. J. Corsini (Ed.), Current psy-
chotherapies (2nd ed.)(pp. IBS-229). ithsca, IL: F. E. pea.ock. '-
Ettin, M. F. (1992). Foundations and applications of group psychotherapy: A sphere of
influence. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Feder, E., and Feder, B. (1981). The expressioe arts therapies. Englewood cliffs, Nf:
Prentice-Hall.
Goldman, E. 8., Morrison, D. s., & fthramski, T. G, (19g2). Codirecting therapy:
A method for psychodr"ryli?t training. lourna! iy croup osyitrottruiiy,
Psychodrama, & Sociometry, 3S(2),65-69. -
Kellermann,_ P. F. (7992a). Processing in psychodrama. lournal of Group
Psychotherapy, Psychodrama & Socioie t ry, 4Se), SS-ZS.
Kellermann, P.F. (192b). The p-lyghqdramatist. lournar of croup psychotherapy,
Psychodrama & Sociometry, 4S(Z), 74-BB.
Lowen, A. (1sr5). Bioenergetic analysis. In R. J. Corsini & D. wedding (Eds.),
Current psychotherapies (sth ed.)(pp. 409-418). Itasca, IL: F. E. peacoci.' '
McNiff, s. (1986). Educating the creatiae arts therapist: A profte of the profession.
Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas.
Nicholas, M. w. (l9u). Change in the context of group therapy. New york:
Brunner/Mazel.
Nolte, J., and Hale, A. E. (1976). The director's soliloquy and the director,s dou-
ble. Group Psychotherapy and psychodrama,2g, Zi3i.
seeman, H. (1982). A methodology for existential psychotherapy: psvchodrama.
lournal of Group Psychotherapy, psychodrama &'Sociometry, 36tZl, iWZ.
stein, M. 8., & Callahan,_ M. L (1982). The use of psychodrama in individual psy-
!l9tl:Iupy. lournal of Group psychotherapy, psychodrama A Sociometry, 3b(5),
ttut29.
Zuretti, M. (1982). Teaching the psychodramatic method. In M. pines & L.
Rafaelsen (Eds.),The indiuidual and the group. New york: plenum.

1l
A Brief History of Psychodrama
Psychodrama, invented by I. t-. Moreno, MD, was a product of
philosophical interest in the phenomenon of creativity, in the
nature of spontaneous play in experiments with children, in socio-
logical dynamics, and a desire to reform the theatre to make it
more involving, real, and meaningful to people. Gradually, from
these multidimensional foundations, Moreno began to apply
improvisational dramatics in the service of family, grouP and indi-
vidual psychotherapy. Moreno's life was eventful and complex,
and this chapter will offer only an overview of its high points. A
number of articles have been written about him, mentioned at the
end of this chapter in the references, but especially notable are
Marineau's 1989 biography of Moreno, Moreno's own abridged
autobiography edited by his son, Jonathan (Moreno, 1989), and
three chapters I wrote in Foundations of Psychodrama which dis-
cuss other contributors to the field-noting especially events in the
life of his wife, Zerka Toeman Moreno-and offer a consideration
of why psychodrama remained a rather minor development in the
field of psychotherapy during his lifetime (Blatner, 1988).
Jacob Levy Moreno was bom on May 19, 1889, in Bucharest,
Rumania. [n a number of his own earlier books, he gave the date
1892, and also at times said that he was born on a boat in the Black
Sea, but this has since been corrected (Bratescu, 1975). He was the
oldest of six children. When he was five years old his family
moved to Vienna. Moreno attended the University of Vienna as a
student of philosophy and was impressed with the currently PoP-
ular ideas about creativity, such as those presented by Henri
177

178
Acting-ln
Bergson. Around 1908, he also became interested in the play of
children in the city's parks, and involved himself as a catalyst, dis-
covering that their vitality was enhanced when they improvised in
enacting familiar stories rather than following conventional inter-
pretations.
Moreno then went on to medical school at the University of
Vienna (circa 1912-7917). During this period, he also explored his
ideas of a more creative type of theology, developed his philoso-
phy of encounter, and implemented his ideas in social action. For
example, he instituted self-help groups for some of the prostitutes
in the city; indeed, this may have been one of the first examples of
the use of both self-help groups and of what might today be con-
sidered a form of community psychiatry.
Around the end of his medical training Moreno was assigned to
be the physician attending a refugee camp in the nearby town of
Mittendorf. The patterns of cultural disorganization he noticed
there seemed to be partly products of artificial rules. He proposed
that opening the governing process more to input from the
refugees themselves might make the stress of relocation a bit more
humane. This application of his ideas about "encounter" (and he
was one of the earliest writers to use this term) to sociological
problems was the seed of his later method of sociometry:
Interviewing the people at the camp regarding whom they would
prefer to have as neighbors, he used feedback to work out more
congenial living arangements. This may seem obvious today, but
at the time it was a highly innovative approach, contrasting with
the tendencies of administrators to assign living quarters and jobs
on an arbitrary or bureaucratic basis.
Vienna in the first few decades of this century was a center of
intellectual activity. During and after medical school Moreno
plunged into the literary, philosophical, and social milieu of the
city. He edited a literary journal, Daimon, and included in its con-
tents the writings of such fellow intellectuals as Martin Buber and
Max Scheler. Moreno also wrote inspirational poetry and prose.
One of his earliest books (later translated from the German as The
Words of the Father) expressed his view that creativity was some-
thing that flowed through every individual and that was renewed
in every moment (Blatner, 1985). His earliest books were published

A Brief History of Psvchodrantet
anonymously, a symbolic gesture of his inclusive ideals, but later,
seeing that there was no advantage to this, he noted his author-
ship.
Fascinated by the theater, but feeling that it had become a
degraded form, Moreno wanted to see more impromptu acting,
more vitality. In many ways, he was anticipating the emergence of
experimental forms in theater which arose almost a half-century
later. He organized a troupe of actors and began to experiment
with various types of improvsational drama, such as the "living
newspaper." Moreno dates the roots of psychodrama itself to his
first public performance in April, 7921.. Later he renamed his
troupe Die Stegreiftheatre-in English, "The Theatre of
Spontaneity." The principles governing the troupe's performances
were then written in a book with the same title. This experimental
"improv" troupe had some good reviews and periods of success.
Incidentally, Moreno's fertile mind also produced plans for one of
the first "theatres in the round."
During this time, Moreno lived in the Viennese suburb of Voslau
and served the community as their public health officer and fami-
ly physician-and was reputed to be very competent. He was lov-
ingly remembered many years later as "our doctor." Perhaps his
role as doctor helped him discover an interesting side effect of his
"improv" troupe: the role-taking process was often cathartic and
healing for the actors themselves.
Because postwar Vienna suffered from runaway inflation and
the society was disorganized, Moreno, unable to sustain his exper-
iments with the drama, decided to emigrate to the United States.
Arriving in New York in 7925,he was able to introduce his ideas to
the various hospitals and clinics in the area.
Moreno was a man of many talents. He had invented something
like a wire recorder, and it was with the sponsorship of a busi-
nessman in the United States that he was able to immigrate. Later
on, he wrote some of the earliest papers about the possible appli-
cations of both audio and video recording in psychotherapy.
In the 1930s, Moreno consulted with prisons, residential treat-
ment centers for delinquent adolescents, and various other facili-
ties. These experiences fitted with his emerging identity as a psy-
t79

tE0
Acting-In
chiatrist dedicated to social concerns. He coined the term group
psychotherapy in 1932, and became one of the pioneers of the pro-
motion of this approach. He continued to develop his theoretical
and practical ideas about sociometry, and in 1934 published Who
shall suntiae? ANew Approach to the Problem of Human lnterrelations.
This book included many of his early ideas about psychodrama,
role theory, and social psychology (Hare, 1986,l99Z). Sociometry
went on to become a significant method in sociology, especially
around the mid-1950s, and the journal Sociometry: A lournal of
lnterpersonal Relations, which Moreno initiated, is still published by
the American Sociological Association.
In 1935, Moreno opened a sanitarium in Beacon, New York,
about 60 miles north of New York City on the Hudson River. He
built a theater designed specifically for psychodrama and began to
treat patients using that method. Although Moreno has stated that
he invented the method earlier, it seems apparent to me that it was
during the period of around 1935 through 1945 that he was really
developing psychodrama as a form of psychotherapy. The Moreno
Sanitarium became his home and the hub of a number of related
activities. He also started his own publishing operation, Beacon
House, which put out a series of journals, monographs and books
on the subjects of psychodrama, sociometry, group psychotherapy,
and related topics.
Also around that time Moreno had contacts with a number of
other pioneers and believed that he had been influential in the
development of their work: Samuel R. Slavson (with whom he
developed a maior rivalry), Alfred Korzybski (who originated the
field of semantics), Kurt Lewin, and a number of Lewifs students
in the subsequent years (Berger, 1990; Cramer-Azima,1990). For
these reasons, Moreno felt that he deserved more credit in the
ensuing years, especially regarding the origins of the ideas that
gave rise to the "T-Group," sensitivity training, and the encounter
group movement (Bradford, Gibb, & Benne, 1964).
During the Second World War, Moreno continued to practice,
opened an institute for training in New York City, did sociometric
studies in schools in the area, and organized the first professional

A Brief History of Psvchodrama
association devoted to grouP psychotherapy, the American Society
of Group Psychotherapy and Psychodrama (ASGPP). After the
war, he began to publish other iournals, more monographs, books,
and articles. At the beginning of the 1940s, he met Zerka Toeman,
who became professionally associated with him (Moreno, 1'970).
They were married in1949, and together they began to teach and
present Moreno's ideas and methods throughout the United States
and intemationally.
From the period of 1940 through the mid-1960s, psychoanalysis
held a hegemony in psychotheraPy, but Moreno's action methods
served as one of the maior alternatives to the relative passivity of
traditional psychiatric treatment. Moreno also actively encouraged
a wide range of other forms of therapy, using his iournals and the
professional meetings of the ASGPP as vehicles for the promotion
of such approaches as dance therapy, Poetry therapy, family thera-
py, and so forth.In turn, psychodramatic methods have since been
integrated into many of the "innovative" approaches that have
emerged since the 1960s, such as "family sculpture" (another name
for action sociometry), Gestalt therapy, and so on. In addition, psy-
chodramatic elements are used in conjunction with Adlerian ther-
apy and behavior therapy, among others.*
rEric Berne wmte: "ln his selection of specific techniques, Dr. Perls shares with other'active'
psychotherapists the'Moreno problem': The fact that nearly all known 'active' techniques
were first triid out by Dr. J. L. Moreno in psychodrama, so that it is difficult to come up with
an rrriginal idea in this regard." From a review of Gestalt Therapy Verbatim, Annricntt
lournal of Psychiatry, l25ll0 15-20,), April 1970.
A. H. Maslow (the "dean" of American humanistic psychology) wrote, regarding fane
Howard's article trn Esalen and other new developments in education and psychotherapy,
"l would however like to add one credit-where-credit-is-due furtnote. Many of the tech-
niques set forth in the article were originally invented by Dr. facob Morelo, who is still
functioning vigorously and probably still inventing new techniques and ideas." ([,etter to
Editors, LIFE Magazine, August 2,19681.
Dr. William Schutz (a maior figure in the American encounter trouP movement) noted that
". . . Virtually atl of the methods that I had proudly compiled or invented lMorenol had
mor€ or less anticipated, in some cases forty years earlier...," "Leuner's original article (on
guided fantasy) has appeared in (Moreno's) Journal in about 1932, and he had been using
ihe method periodically since... t invite you kr investigate Moreno's work. lt is probably not
sufficiently acknowledged in this country. Perls'Gestalt Therapy owes a great deal to it. lt
is imaginitive and worth exploring." (Hcrc Conrcs Eterybody, Harper & Row, 1971.)
r81

182
Acting-In
Moreno collaborated with a number of leaders in the field of
mental health. He and zerka were major organizers of the first
international conferences of group psychotherapy, along with s. H.
Foulkes of Great Britain, s. Lebovici of France, and other eminent
figures. Beginning with a group called the Internationar
Committee of Group Psychotherapy, the attendees began planning
in Paris in 1951, and held periodic meetings through 1973, when
the name of the group was changed to the International
Association of Group Psychotherapy (IAGP). These conferences
were usually attended by over 1,000 participants each time. In the
1960s and early 7970s Moreno also organized a series of
lntemational Congresses of Psychodrama and sociodrama, which
reflected the widespread reception of psychodrama. Moreno,s
books, along with books on psychodrama being produced by writ-
ers in other countries, have been translated into many languages.
Moreno's energy, vitality, charisma, and drive were remarkable.
He had his faults, too: Like a number of other innovators, he was
often insensitive to group and personal politics. yet the sheer range
of interests and the validity of his vision combine to generate a
powerful complex of ideas that continue to find increasing appre-
ciation for their relevance to the challenges of today,s world.
In May \974, after a period of gradually declining health,
Moreno decided to die and therefore stopped eating. He received
visitors who came to pay their respects and died soon after the
annual meeting of the ASGPP. since that time, Zerka Moreno has
carried on the work, teaching all over the world, writing, and
encouraging others. she has also fostered more democratic partic-
ipation and control in the ASGPP.
Psychodrama continues to be a significant component of the
International Association of Group Psychotherapy. with Moreno's
name on its letterhead as the founder, IAGP meetings have been
held every three years, most recently the eleventh in Montreal,
1992, and the twelfth in Buenos Aires in 1995. The thirteenth is
bging planned for 1998 in London. International meetings on psy-
chodrama continue also in such locations as England, Austriria,
Italy, |apan, and Jerusalem with significant activity in Scandinavia,
Germany, and emerging in eastern Europe.

A Brief History of Psychodrama
rE3
In addition to the continuing expansion of psychodrama inter-
nationally, there has, in addition, been a growth of national associ-
ations and journals. In the United States and elsewhere, there has
been a move towards professional certification boards, as
described in the previous chapter on training. As the cost-contain-
ment crisis continues in the health care fields, the use of psy-
chodrama in hospital therapy may decline somewhat, but its use
will increase in day treatment. Also, I envision more use of this
method in its modified forms of sociodrama and action techniques
in other social institutions, thus implementing Moreno's "socio-
therapeutic" goals of bringing these methods and principles to the
wider context of our culture. Psychodrama will be used more and
more in the service of preventive mental hygiene and community
building, and even for the more global goals of fostering the capac-
ity for communications, problem solving and self-awareness.
MORENO'S CONTRIBUTIONS
Certainly, as discussed above, Moreno was one of the most ener-
getic pioneers of group psychotherapy in general, and psychodra-
ma in particular. He worked toward a general rapproachment of
the social and the individual dimensions of psychology. His role
theory has a great potential as the basis for a more integrative the-
ory of psychology, and his many techniques have helped to make
the field of psychotherapy more eclectic and dynamic-in the
sense of being able to achieve in a much shorter time what used to
require months or even years of more verbal, nondirective talk
therapy.
But beyond this, and still generally unappreciated, is the sheer
richness of his philosophical and psychological observations.
These continue to have great relevance, perhaps even more now
than in his own time, because the challenge in our era is to find the
courage to take initiative, to become involved, to apply in a collec-
tive fashion that quality of spontaneity he said was so important.
Holmes, Karp, and Watson (1994) comment on the "matrix" of
psychodrama and how Moreno's many concepts may be viewed in

r84
Acting-In
terms of how they address both the psychospiritual and the con-
scious-unconscious dimensions.
The many contributions mentioned in the chapter on theory
have yet to be deeply understood and appreciated by most social
scientists or psychotherapists. Moreno's emphasis on creativity is
particularly relevant in addressing the challenges of our postmod-
ern world. But, further, his deeper philosophical ideas lend a mea-
sure of depth and suggest the possibility oI operationalizing methods
to a number of other contemporary intellectual trends (Blatnea
1985; Blatner & Blatner, 1988; Lindqvist, 1994). One of the most
prominent of his themes is a return to a more spiritual sensibility,
and in closing I would suggest that psychodramatic methods have
great promise for helping people integrate the most essential pro-
cedures in psychotherapy with other aspects of transpersonal psy-
chology. The synthesis of a spiritual, social, and individual per-
spective with a praxis, a complex of techniques and principles,
then, explains the opening line to Moreno's Who Shall Suraioe?
(1934): "A true therapeutic procedure cannot have less an objective
than the whole of mankind" (p. 3).
REFERENCES / RECOMMENDED READINGS
Berge-r, M. M. (1990). j. L. Moreno's autobiography: More than meets the eye.
lournol of Group Psychotherapy, Psychodrama & Sociometry, 42(4),21y221.
Blatner, A. (1985). Moreno's "process philosophy." lournal ol Group Psychotherapy,
Psychodrama & Sociometry, 38(3), 133-136.
Blatner, A. (1988). Foundations of psychodrama: History, theory, and practice (spe-
cially pp. 7H2, 197-198). New York: Springer.
Blatner, A., & Blatner, A. (1988). The metaphysics of creativity as reflected in
Moreno's "metapraxie" and the mystical tradition. lournal of Group
P sy chotherapy, P sy chod rama & Soc io nrctry, 40(4), 1 55-1 63.
Blatner, A. (1995). Images in psychiatry: f. L. Moreno. American lournal ol
Psychiatry, 1 52(111, I 6U.
Blatner, A. (1996). Moreno's idde fixe. lournal of Group Psychotherapy, Psychodrama
{t sociometry,48 (4), 15}158.
Borgatta, E. F., Boguslaw, R., & Haskell, M. (1975). On the work of ]acob L.
Moreno. Sociometry, 38fi ), l4Fl61.

A Brief History of Psychodrama
1t5
Bradford, L., Gibb, f. R., and Benne, K. D. (1964). T-Group theory and laboratory
method: lnnoaatiotts in re-cducatiott. New York: Wiley.
Bratescu, C. (1975). The date and birthplace of I. L. Moreno. Group Psychotherapy,
Psyclodranm & Sociomctry, 28,24.
Buchanan, D. R. (1981). Forty-one years of psychodrama at St. Elizabeths
Hospital. Jounul of Group Psrlchotherapv, Psyclrcdrann [t Socionrctry, 34,
134-t47.
Corsini, R. I. (1955). Historic background of group psychotherapy. Croup
P sychotherapy, 8(31, 279-225.
Cramer-Azima, F. (190). Moreno-A personal reflection. lournal ol Group
Psychtttherapy, Psychodrnnn & Socionrct ry, 42(41, 222-224.
Fox, J. (1978). Moreno and his theatre. lourual of Group Psychtttherapy, Psychodrann
fi Socionrctry, 31, 109-116.
Hare, A. P. (1985). Moreno's contribution to social
P sychttl hc ro py, P sv chod r a n m tt Soc ion t e t r y, 39(3),
Itturnal ol Group
Hare, A. P. (1992)'. Moreno's sociometric study at the Hudson School for Girls.
Itturnnl ol Group Psttchothuapy, Psychodranm & Socionrctrv, 45(11,21-19.
psychology.
8F94.
Holmes, P., Karp, M., & Watson, M. (Eds.). (1994). The matrix of
Psychoilronm sinct' Moruro: Innopations in thaorv ond pracl
London: Routledge.
psychodrama. In,
icc (pp. 11F1r5).
Horley, J. & Strickland, L. H. (1984). A note on facob Moreno's contribution to the
development of social network analysis. lournal rtf Cttnmrunity Psychology,
12(31,291-293.
Kraus, C., & Clouse, f. (Spring, 1986). Report from the J. L. Moreno collection.
lournal of Croup Psychtttherapy, Psychodranm & Strionrtry, 39(7), 4144.
(Collection in the rare books and manuscripts department, F, A. Countway
Library of Medicine in Boston.)
Lindqvist, M. (1994). Religion and the spirit: The cosmic circus. In P. Holmes, M.
Karp, & M. Watson (Eds.), Ps.ycftodranm since Mort,tntt: Ittnornlions in thcory and
yrnct icc (pp. 191-2C9). London: Routledge.
Leutz, C. A. (1978). Recent developments of psychodrama in Western Europe.
Groult Psychothuopy, Psychodronm, tt Srtciotnctry, 31 ,76V773.
Marineau, R. F. (1989). lacoh Lnti Morttilt,1889-1974. London: Routledge.
Marineau, R. F. (1990). l.L. Mttrano, sn oir, soll ttctrure. Montreal: Editions SainF
Martin. (ln French, expanded, has extra photos.)
Marineau, R.F. (1994). Bucharest and Vienna: The cradles of Moreno's contribu-
tions. In P. Holmes, M.Karp, & M.Watson (Eds.), Psvcltodranm sincc Moreno:
Innoualions in theory nnd ltractict'(pp. 8l-9a). London: Routledge.
Meiers, J. (1949). Origins and development of group psychotherapy: Historical
su rvey, 1930- I 945. Sttc ion rt ry, 8(4), 499-530.

lg6 
Acting-In
Moreno, J. D. (Ed.). (1989). The autobiography of f.L. Moreno, M.D.: parts 1 and
Z._lour_nol of Group Psyclotherapy, Psychodrama & Socionrctry, 42(7,2), 3-52,
59-125.
Moreno, I. L. (1934). who shall suruiae? A new approach to the problem of human inter-
relations. Washington, DC: Nervous & Mental Disease publisiring. In 1953,
this was revised and expanded, and the subtitle changed to Fouhdations of
socionretry, group psychotherapy, and sociodrnnu. Beacon, Ny Beacon House. Ii
was republished by ASGPP in 1993.
Moreno, I. L. (1969). The Viennese origins of the encounter movement. Group
P sy chot he rapy, 22(3 4), 7 -16.
Moreno, J. L. (19701. Is God a single person? My first encounter with a muse of
h i gh o rd er, Zerka. G ro u p P sy c h o t h e r apy, 2 3(34), 7 5-7 8.
Moreno, Z.T. (1967). The se6in61 mind of J. L. Moreno and his influence upon the
p resent genera tio n. G r o up P sy c ho t h e ra p y, 20 (3- 4), 278-229.
Moreno, Z. T. (1976). In memoriam: Jacob L(evy) Moreno. Croup psyclrctherapy,
P sy chod rn nu & Soc io m et ry, 29, 130-135.
Renouvier, P. (1955). The group psychotherapy movement and J. L. Moreno.
G rou p P sy chot he rapy, 11 (1-2), 69-88.
Sacks, J. M. (1977). Reminiscence of J. L. Moren o. Group, 1(3), 194-200.
Treadwell, T., & Treadwell, l. (1972). The pioneer of the group encounter move-
ment. Group Psychotherapy, 25(l-Z), t6-26.
Weiner, H. B. (1968). I. L. Moreno-Mr. Group psychotherapy. Group
P sy c ho t he ra py, 2L (34), 1 44-1 50.
Wolberg, A. R. (1976). The contributions of Jacob Moreno. In L. R. Wolberg & M.
L. Aronson (Eds.), Group therapy, 1976-An oaeroiew (pp. l-15). Nevi york:
stratton Intercontinental Medical Book Corp. (There ariiome other fine arti-
cles that are also relevant in this book.)
Whitaker, C. (1988). Foreword. In. J. Fox (Ed.l,The essential Moreno (vii-ix). New
York: Springe
Yablonsky, L. (1975). Psychodrama lives. Hmnan Behaaior, 4,25-Zg.

Bibliography
One of the goals of this book is to promote scholarship, the read-
ing of books and articles and further research and writing in the
field. To this end I've sought to provide updated resources in each
edition. Because of the recent efforts of Sacks, Bilaniuk and
Gendron (1995), I've felt I could emphasize the more current items
in the literature, and have therefore omitted a number of older ref-
erences that were in previous editions.
The following references cover the more general issues in the
field, and are meant to supplement the more topic-centered refer-
ences at the ends of each of the previous chapters-and especially
the various types of applications at the end of Chapter 8.
I have also included a number of books on drama therapy
because of the relevance of underlying theory and principles of
treatment. Furthermore,l have inserted two appendixes, noting (a)
major books written by psychodramatists in other countries, (b)
some journals in other countries, and (c) the addresses of the pub-
lishers who have a significant number of major texts on subjects
related to this field.
AMERICAN IOURNALS
Most of the articles in the psychodrama literature are to be found
in the journals that Moreno started, but some of these have
changed their name several times.
Sociometry: A lournal of Interpersonal Relafions, Vols. 1-18,
7937-7956. The early volumes contain some of Moreno's basic
ideas and include articles on activities related to psychodrama, the
expressive arts in therapy, family therapy, and other areas aside
from just sociometry. However, in 1956, this iournal was turned
over to the American Sociological Association and became a more
academic and formal social science iournal.
1E7

f88 
Acfing-In
Moreno continued to publish on sociometric and other topics,
though, and intermittently produced:
Internat ional I ournal of Sociomet ry, Yols. 1-5, 1956-196g.
Handbook of Int ernational Sociomet ry, yols. 6-.8, 197l-7973.
. His second major iournal (after Sociometry) eventually became
the major, ongoing professional vehicle for psychodrami. Its first
title was sociatry (subtitled: A lournal of -Group and lntergroup
Therapy), volumes 1-3 were published fromL947-1950. Later titres
were Group Psychotherapy (Yols. 4-22, 1951-1970) and Group
P sychotherapy and P sy chodrama (Vols. Z}-ZB, 7970-1925).
Following l\4oreno's death in 1924, the journal was edited by a
committee of leaders in the field of psychodrama and renamed
Group Psychotherapy, Psychodraml, and Sociometry (yols. 2919,
r97G1980).
As the American Society for Group psychotherapy and
Psychodrama became more organized, it contracted wiih the
Helen Dwight Reid Educational Foundation (HELDREF) to pub-
lish its joumal, beginning in 1980. In 1981 the name became Joirnal
of Group Psychotherapy, Psychodrama, €r' Sociometry (Vols. 34+,l9gl
through the present). For subscription information or to submit an
article for publication, write to:
I:yrylglQrolp Psychotherapy, Psychodrama & Sociometry
HELDREF Publications
1319 Eighteenth Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036-7802
GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY
Badaines, A. (19_88) Psy_chodrama. in f. Rowan & w. Dryden (Eds.),lnnoaatiae
Therapy in Britain. Open University press.
Barragar Dunne, P. (1992).The narratiae tlrcrapist and the arts: Expanding possibilities
tlrough dr_ama, nrou.ement,.puppets, masks and drawings. L6s Ang"eies: Drama
I\"nef .lnstitute/ Possibilities Press, 1315 Westw6od Blvd, ios Angeles,
cA 90024-4901.
Bentley, E.-(1977). Theatre and therapy. In w. Anderson (Ed.), Therapy and the arts
(pp. 29-50). New York: Harper,/Colophon.
Bischof, L. t- (1954). lnterpreting personality theories (pp. 35F420). New york:
Harper & Row.

Bibliography 
f E9
Bilaniuk, M. T. (1990). Bibliography of Psychodrama, 1980-1.990. Toronto: Author.
(See also Sacks, Bilaniuk, & Gendron, 1995.)
Blatner, H. A. (Ed.) {1968). Practical aspecls of psychodranra. Belmont, CA: Author.
(Out of print. May be available at some libraries.) (N.8.: In 1.977 H. A. Blatner
changed his name to A. Blatner, so these items are placed in chronological rather
t han alphabe t ical ord er.l
Blatner, H. A. (Ed.) (1970). Psychodrann, role-playing and action ntethods: Theory and
practice. Thetford, England: Author. (This was a revision and expansion of
the previous book, also now out of print.)
Blatner, H. A. (1973). Actitrg-ln: Practical applications of psychodranratic methods (lst
ed.). New York: Springer. (BIue cover; 1988, 2nd ed., revised and updated,
purple cover.)
Blatner, A. (19E5). Creating your liuing,: Applications of psychodramatic methods in
eacryday lr/e. San Marcos, TX: Author. Out of print. Being revised and
expanded for republication.
Blatner, A. (in preparation). Role dynanics: An integratiue language for psychology.
Blatner, A., & Blatner, A. (1988). The Art of Play: An adult's guide to reclaining imag'
ination and spontaneity. New York: Human Sciences.
Blatnec A. with Blatner, A. (1988). Foundatiotts of psychodranra: History, theory, and
praclice. New York: Springer.
Blatner, A. (1995). Psychodramatic methods in psychotherapy. Psychiatric Times,
12(5\,20.
Blatner, A. (1995). Psychodrama. In R. ). Corsini and D. Wedding (Eds.), Current
Psychotherapies (5th ed., pp. 399-408.). ltara, IL: Peaccrck. (Also in 4th ed.,
1989.)
Boal, A. (1985). Thcatrt' of tltc oppresscd. New York: Theatre Communications
Group. (Applications of Morenean-like ideas and methods in Latin
America.)
Bcries, K. G. (1973). Role playing as a behavior change technique: Review of the
empirical literature. ln I. M. Marks et. al. (Eds.), Psychothcrapy and bchauior
changt', 1972 (pp.372-379). Chicago: Aldine.
Bouquet, C. M. (1982). Theory of the scene. In M. Pines and L. Rafaelsen (Eds.),
Thc indiaidual ond the group (pp. 179-186). New York: Plenum.
Brazier, D. (1991). A guide to ltsychodronta. London: Association for Humanistic
Psychology in Britain.
Buchanan, D. R. (1984). Psychodrama. In T. B. Karasu (Ed.), Tfte psychiatric thera-
pies, Part 2: thc psychosocial thuapics (pp. 78T799). Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Association.
Buchanan, D. R., & Taylor, I. A. (1985). fungian typology of professional psy-
chodramatists: Myers-Briggs type indicator analysis of certified psy-
chodramatists. Psychologicol Reports, 58, 39140[.

190
Acting-In
Clayton, G. M. (1991). Directing psychodrama: A training componion.Available from
ICA Centre. 157 Hawthorne Rd., Caulfield, victoria,'Australia 3152. other
small books available by Dr Clayton:
\!S-lll. \nncing life €t relationships: Role training.
(1993). Liaing pictures of the self: Role theory.
Q99g. Effe c t iae grolt p l eade r sh ip.
Cohen, Tt. G., I Lipkin, G. B. (1979). Psychodrama . tn Therapeutic group uork for
health professionals (pp.179-217). New York: Springer.
corey, G. (1994). Psychodrama, Chapter 8. In Theory and practice of group counsel-
rng (4th ed., pp. 206-235). Pacific Grove, CA: tirooks,/Cole. Also griod chap-
ters in 2nd ed (1985) and 3rd ed. (1990).
Corsini, R. J., and Putzey, L. J. (1956). The historic background of group psy-
chotherapy. Croup Psychotherapy, 9, tZ7-249. A 1200- item bibliograpliy
including items dating from 1906-1955.
Corsini, R. I. (1967). Role plnying in psychotherary. Chicago: Aldine. Has annotated
bibliography.
Davies, M. H. (1988). Psychodrama group therapy. In M. Aveline & WDryden
(Eds.), Group Therapy in Britain (pp. 88-l1 ). Open University press.
Dayton, T. (1994). The Drama within: Psychodrama and experientiar therapy.
Deerfield Beach, FL: Health Communications Inc.
Emunah, R. (1994). Acting for real. Dranu tlwapy process and technique. New york:
Brunner/Mazel. Definitive textl
Farmer, C. (1995). Psychodrann and systentic therapy. London: Karnac.
Feldhendler, D. (1994). Aug-ust9 Boal and facob L. Moreno: Theatre and therapy.
In M. Schutzman & J. Cohen-Cruz (Eds.), Playing Boal: Theatre, theripy,
actiaism (pp. 87-109). London: Routledge.
Fine, L. f. (1979). Psychodrama. In R. J. Corsini (Ed.), Current psychotherapies (2nd
ed., pp. 428459).ltasca, IL: Peacock.
Fleshman, 8., & Fryrear, ]. (1981). The arts in therapy. Chicago: Nelson Hall.
Fox, f . (Ed.). (19871. The essential Moreno: Writings on psychodrama, group method,
and spontaneify. New York: Springer.
Fox, J..0994)..Ac.t.s.of se-raice: Spont_aneity, commitment, traditiotr in the nonscripted
theatre. Available from Tusitala Publishing, 137 Hasbrouck Rd., New piltz,
NY 12561.
Fuhlrodt, R. L. (Ed.). ('1990). Psychorlranm: lts application to AC)A and substance
abuse treatntenl. Available from Perrin & Treggett Books, 3130 Rt 10 W
Denville, NI 07834.
Gale, D. (1990). What is psycltotlranra? A personal and practical gurde. Loughton,
England: Gale Centre Publications.
Gendron, I. (1980). Moreno: The roots and the branches; and bibliography ofpsychodra-
ma,1972-1980. Beacon, NY Beacon House.

Bibliogrophl,
l9l
Cold, M. (1997).The t'ictionol t'antily in dranm, cducation, and group ruork' Springfield,
lL: Charles C. Thomas.
Goldman, E. E., & Morrison, D. S. (1984). Psychodrann: Experience and process.
Eldemar Corp. (5812 N. 12th St. # 32, Phoenix, AZ 85014)
Goldman, E. 8., Morrison, D. C., & Goldman, M. S. (1987). Psychodrama: ATraining
Videolape. Phoenix, AZ: Eldemar Corp.
Grainger, R. (1990). Dronm & Healing: The roots of drann therapy. London: Jessica
Kingsley.
Greenberg, L A. (1968). Psychorlramo anil audicncc atlitude change. Beverly Hills:
Behavioral Studies Press.
Creenberg, I. A. (Ed.). (1974). Psycltodranm: Theory and tlrcrapy. New York:
Behavioral Publications.
Creenberg, I. A. (Ed.). (1977). Group lrypnothcrapy and lrypnodrann (pp.231-303).
Chicago: Nelson-Hall.
Greenberg, I. A. (1986). Psychodrama. In I. L. Kutash & A. Wolf (Eds'),
Psychtrtherapist's caschook (pp 392a1\. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Gregoric, L., & Gregoric, M. (1981). Sociodrama: Video in social action. In J. L.
Fryrear & B. Fleshman (Eds.), Viclaothcrnpy in nrcntal hcalth (pp.244-256').
Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas.
Haas, R. B. (1949). Psychodrann and socittdranrn in Anrcrican educatitttt. Beacon, NY
Beacon House.
Haas, R. 8., & Moreno, J. L. (1961). Psychodrama as a projective technique. In H.
H. Anderson and G. L. Anderson (Eds.) An introduction to proiectioe tach-
nirTrrcs (pp 662-$75). Englewood CIiffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Hale, A. E. (1981; 1985). Conducting clitricol socionrctric cxltlorolions: A uanual for
psych.tllrniltatisls nrtrl sociorrtclrisfs-. A revised, expanded edition is due out by
1996 from Royal Publishing, 2757 Richelieu Ave., Roanoke, YA 24014. A
classic.
Hare, A. P. (1985). Socinl intaroction as drann. Beverly Hills: Sage.
llare, A. P. (1986). Bibliography of the work of J. L. Moreno. lournal of Group
P sr1 chot hcr a pr1, P st1 ch ttd rn nn, a n d Soc io md r y, 39(3), 95-1 28.
Haskell, M. R. (1975). Socioanalysis: Sc[ diraction uia sociontctry nnd psycltodrann.
Long Beach: Role Training Associates (1750 E. Ocean Blvd., Long Beach, CA
90802).
Haskell, R. J., I'earl, C. 8., & Haskell, M. R. (1986) . A world in rnicrocosnt:
Psyclndrnnn antl relntctl srrtyccls. Previously entitled Socionrctry through groult
intt,raction psrlclnttlrcrapy. Long Beach, CA: Role Training Associates.
Heilveil, l. (1983). Vitleo in nrcntnl lrcnlth proctict'(pp. 60-67). New York: Springer.
Heisey, M. J. (1932). Clinical ca.sc sftl/rcs in psychodratrra. Washington, DC:
University Press of America.

192 
Acfing-In
Holmes, P. (1992). The inner world outside: object relations theory and psychodrama.
New York: Routledge.
Holmes,.P., & K-arp, M. (Eds.) (1991). Psychodrama: inspiratiotr & technique. New
York: Routledge.
Holmes, 0., 5u.p, M., & Watson, M. (Eds.). (1994). psychodrama since Moreno:
lnnoaations in theory and practice.London & New yoik ravistock/Routledge,
Important collection of articles by current leaders in the field.
Hudgins, M. K. (1995). The therapeutic spiral mode!: An experiential approach to trau-
ma. New York: Guilford. Other monographs on psychodrama by Hudgins
(1991-1995) are available from the Center for 
-Experiential-Learning.
Madison, WI.
Irwin, E. C., & Portner; E. (Eds.) (l9u). The scope of dramo therapy: proceedings from
the first annual drama therapy conferenci. New Havdn, CT: Nitional
Association for Drama Therapy.
Jennings, s. (1973). Remedial drama. London: pitman. (U.s. publication, 1974, and
revised 2nd ed., 1982. New York: Theatre Arts Books.)
Jennings, s._(Ed.). (1987). Dramatherapy: Theory and practice for teachers arul clini-
cians. Cambridge, MA: Brookline.
Jennings, s. (1990). Dramatherapy withfamilies, groups and indiaiduals: waiting in the
zuirgs. London: fessica Kingsley.
Jennings, s. (Ed.). (19921. Dramatherapy theory and practice 2. London: Routledge.
Jennings, s., & Minde, A. (1993). Art therapy and dramatherapy: Mosks of the sont.
London: fessica Kingsley.
fennings, S. (1994a). lntroduction to dramatherapy. London: fessica Kingsley.
fennings, s. (Ed.). (1995). Dramatherapy with children and adolescents. London &
New York: Routledge.
fennings, S., Cattanach, A., Mitchell, S., Meldrum, 8., & Chesner, A. (1994).
Handbook of Dromatherapy. London: Routledge.
Kippgr, D. A. (1986). Psychotherapy through clinical role playing. New york:
Brunner/Mazel.
Kippea D. A. (19%) Psychodrama Gpup psychotherapy through role praying.
lnternationol lournal of Group psychotherapy, 42(4), 495-521. -
Kellermann, P F. (1992). Focus on psychodrama: The therapeutic aspects of psychodra-
na. London: fessica Kingsley.
Kumar, v. K., & Treadwell, T. w. (198s). practical sociometry for psycrrcdramatists.
West Chestec PA: Authors.
Landy, R. J. (1993). Persona and performance: The meaning of role in drama, therapy,
and eoeryday ly'e. New York: Guilford.

Bibliographv
193
Landy, R.l. (1994). Dronn therapy: Concepts and Prnctices. (2nd Ed.) Springfield,lL:
Charles C Thomas. (lst ed., 1986).
Langley, D. (1983). Dronntlrcrapy and psychiatry. London: Croom Helm.
Lebovici, S. (1974). A combination of psychodrama and psychoanalysis. In S. de
Schill (Ed.), The challenge for group psychotherapy: Present and future (pp.
28G315). New York: International Universities Press.
Lee, R. H. (1981). Video as adiunct to psychodrama and role playing. In I. L.
Fryrear & B. Fleshman (Eds.), Videotherapy itr un'ntal lrealtlr' Springfield, IL:
Charles C Thomas.
Leveton, E. (1992). A clittician's g,uide to psyclrodrartra. New York: Springer' This is a
second edition of her 197 bcxrk titled: Psychodrann for thc tirnid clirlrcran, also
from Springer.
Link, A. 17921. Mirrors from the heart: Enwtional identity and expression through
dranlo. Ontario, Canada: Elora.
Marineau, R. F. (1989). lncob ltui Moreno, 1889-1974. (A Biography) New York:
Routledge. (A 1990 edition in French published in Quebec has even more
information and photos.)
Martin, R. B. (1991). The assessment of involvement in role playing. lournal ttf
Cl i n ical Psychohtgy, 47, 587 -596.
McReynolds, P., & DeVoge, S. 119771. Use of improvisational techniques in assess-
ment. In P. McReyntlds (Ed.), Aduonces in psychology: Vol.4. As*'ssntt'rrl. San
Francisco: f ossey-Bass.
Miller, M. M. (1971). Psychodrann:Tfu self ort sla.gc" Washington, DC: The New
School of Psychotherapy.
Mitchell, S. (Ed.) (19951. Drantothcrapy: Clinical strrdrt's. London & Bristol, PA:
Jessica Kingsley.
). L. Moneno
For research on M()ren() and his works, his papers are located at the Moreno
Collection, Countway Medical Library, 10 Shattuck St-, Boston, MA 02115
(Telephone: (6171 432488t.
Moreno. J. L. (Jacob Lrvi). Note: The originator of psychodrama was a prolific
writer, publishing scores of articles and monographs on the subiect, only a
few of which we need mention here. A complete listing of his works has
been noted by Hare (1986) (q.v.). Moreno also wrote numerous articles on
group psychotherapy and srrciometry and related subiec!9' His books and
irticl-eihave been translated into many languages. You will notice that most
of his books were published by Beacon House, which was Moreno's own
publishing house, named in honor of his home and sanitarium in Beacon,
New York. Until his death, he also supervised the publication of the maior
iournals devoted to psychodrama, sociometry, and group psychotherapy.
Some of his better known and more substantial writings are listed here.

194 
Acfing-In
Moreno, l. L. (1921). The words of the Father, first published anonymously in
Vienna;.inspirational poetry and some exposition of Moreno's pt itoroptri-
cal-theologlcal ideas. (Also entitled rhe psilchodranta o/ God: A neiu hypotiresis
ol the self.) Reissued in 1971. Beacon, Ny Beacon House.
Moreno, l.L. (1923).The theater of spontaneity. First published in potsdam with the
tille, Das stegreiftheatre, and translated and fublished by Beacon House in
7947 and 1973. Reprinted again in 1983.
Moreno, l. L. (1934). who shall suraiue? A new approach to trrc problenr of hunran inter-
relations. washington, DC: Nervous & Mental Disease publishing. In 1953,
this was revised and. expanded, and the subtitle changed to Fouidations of
sociometry, group psychotherapy, and sociodrnma. Beacon, Ny Beacon House. Ii
was republished by the ASGPP in 1993.
Moreno, l. L. (1946). Psychod_ranu: 7ol. L Beacon, Ny Beacon House. Reprinted
numerous times since then. Republished by ASGpp in 1993.
Moreno, J. L. (Ed.). (1946). Group Psychotherapy: A syruposium. Beacon, Ny Beacon
House.
Moreno, I. L. (1951). (Ed.) socionetry: Experinrctrtal nrcthod antl the science of society.
Beacon, NY Beacon House.
Moreno, I. L. (1956). sociometry and the science of man, Beacon, Ny: Beacon House.
Moreno, l. L. (Ed.). (1956-1960). Progress in psychotherapy (Vols. 1-5). New york:
Grune & stratton. Coedited with Frieda FrommlReichmann (Vol. 1), and
then fules Masserman (Vols. 2-5), both of whom were the first name,s on the
books. This series of five books contains a number of important articles on
psychodrama by Moreno and others.
Moreno, l. L. (1960). The sociontetry rertdcr. Glencoe, lL: The Free press. coedited
with Helen Hall Jennings and others.
Moreno, J. L. (1963). Reflections.on my method of group psychotherapy and psy-
chodrama. CIBA Synrposium, 2(4), 148-157. (Iieirrinted in iSZa in U.
Greenwald (Ed.), Actiue Psychothernpy. New york: Jason Aronson.) (This
book was reissued in 1984.)
Moreno, l. L. (1971). Psychodrama. In H. I. Kaplan
Comprehensiue group psychotherapy (pp. 460-500).
Wilkins.
& B. J. Sadock (Eds.),
Baltimore: Williams &
Moreno,J.L.(1972).The.religionof 
God-Father.lnp.E.Johnson (Ed.),Healerof the
nind: A psychiatrist's search for faith (pp. 192-215). Nashville, TN: Abinglon.
Moreno, l. L. (1987). The essential Moreno. (See Fox, 1987).
Moreno, J. L., & Elefthery, D. G. (i975). An introduction to group psychodrama.
In pe9rye.c3zda (Ed.), B-as1c ayproaches to group psyctrotierapy ind groLtp coun-
seling (Znd. Ed.). Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas.
Moreno, J. L., Friedemann, A., Battegay, R., & Moreno, Z. (Eds.). (1966).
International handbook of group psychotherapy. New york: philosophical
Library.

Bibltographv
Moreno, J. L., & Moreno, Z. T. (1959). Psychodranm, Vol' 2. Beacon, NY: Beacon
House.
Moreno, J. L., & Moreno, Z. T. (1969). Psychodrann, 7ol. 3' Beacon, NY Beacon
House.
Moreno, J. L., & Zeleny, L. D. (1958). Role theory and sociodrama. In J. S. Roucek,
Contcnrporary Soiiologv @p. 6aZa5$. New York: Philosophical Library.
Moreno, J. D. (Ed.). (1989). The autobiography of J. L. Moreno, M.D.: Part 1.
lournal of Croup Psychotherapy, Psvchodroma & Socionrctry,42(1),3-52;Parr2
42(2\,59-125. Abridged, edited by his son, Jonathan.
Moreno, Z. T. (1959). A survey of psychodramatic techniques. Grottp
Psyclrcthernpy,'l 2, 5-74.
Moreno, Z.T. (1965). Psychodramatic rules, techniques, and adiunctive methods.
G rou 1t P sy chothuapy,'l 8(1-2\, 73-86.
Moreno, Z.T. (1978\. Psychodrama. In H. Mullan & M. Rosenbaum (Eds'), Groap
psychotlrcrapv (2nd ed., pp.352-376). New York: Free Press.
Moreno, Z. T. (1983\. Psychodrama. In H. I. Kaplan & B. I. Saclock (Eds.),
Cttntprchcnsiue Xroup psycltothcrapv (2nd ed., pp. 158-165). Baltimore:
Williams & Wilkins.
Moreno. Z. T. (1987). Psychodrama, role theory, and the concePt of the social
atom. In !. Zeig (Ed.), The auolution of psychotheraPy @P.341-358). New York:
Brunner/Mazel. Also excerpted in /GPPS, 42(3),1989.
Murray, N. (1976). Psychodrama-Post Moreno. In A. Wolberg & M. Aronson
(Eds.), Gror4, thuapy, 1976-An ttucruiaTo (pp. 16-20). New York: Stratton
lntercontinental Medical Book Corp.
Naar, R. (1990). Psychodrama in short-term psychotherapy. In R. A. Wells & V' J.
Giannetti (Eds.), Handbook <tf tha bricf psycltothcrnpit's (pp 583-600). New York:
Plenum.
Olsson. P. A. (1980). Psychodrama and literature in evaluation and treatment. In
H. S. Moffic and G. L. Adams (Eds.), A clitrician's nmnual ttn ntenlal hcalth cora:
A multidisciplinarq approach (pp. 130-138). Menlo Park, CA: Addison-Wesley.
Olssrrn, P. A., & Barth. P. A. (1983). New uses of psychodrama. lournal of
Oltc ro t i onal P sy ch ia t ry, 1 4(2), 95-101.
Pearlman, W. D. (1995). Charactars of thc sacrad: 71,r' 11'orld of archctypal drann.
Placitas, NM: Duende Press.
Polansky, N. A. (1982). Ego functions in psychodrama. In hllrgrnted cgo psychologrl
(pp.27V293). New York: Aldine.
Ptrrtner, E. (Ed.). (1986). Dronn tlrcrolty in print: A bibliographtt New Haven, CT:
National Association for Drama Therapy.
Sacks, J. M. (1974). The psychodramatic approach. ln D. S. Milman & G. D.
Goldman (Eds.) Group procer^s tttdnrl: Ettaluation and perspectiacs (pp. 137-145).
Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas.
195

tg6 
Acfing-In
sacks, J. M. (1981). Drama therapy with the acting out patient. In G. schattner &
R. Courtney (Eds.l,Drann in therapy. Vol.2: Adutis (pp.35-56). New york:
Drama Book Specialists.
sacks, I.-M 1(1988).. Psychodlpatic techniques in work with borderline patients.
In N. Slavinska-Holy (Ed.), Borderline and narcissistic patients in theiapy (pp.
341358). Madison, CT International Universities press.
Sacks,J. M. (1990).-Psy_chodrama. In I. L. Kutash & A. Wolf (Eds.),The group psy-
chothuapist's hondbook: Contentporary theory & technique (pp ztt-i3Oy.'Nein,
York: Columbia University Press.
Sacks, f. M. (1993). Psychodrama. In H. I. Kaplan & B. I. Sadock (Eds.),
Conryrehensioe group psychotherapy (Gth ed., pp.214-228). Baltimore: Williams
& Wilkins.
Sacks, J. M., Bilaniuk, M. & Gendron, I. M. (1995). Bibliography of psychodrann:
lnception to date. over 2,000 items, this 130 page book has an ext'ensive index
of 30 pages, and is also available on either Maclntosh or IBM-compatible
computer diskette. Available from Dr James M. sacks, psychodrama Center
of New York, 71 Washington Pl., New york, Ny 10011-91b4 for $35.
Salas, ]. (7993).Improaising real life: Personal story to playback theatre. Dubuque, IA:
Kendall/Hunt.
Salas, J., & Swallow, l. (l?94). Tracing our roots, finding our place. Video of playback
Il-rgat.re regarding the history of psychodrama. Videotape, $35.00. Milean,
VA: American Society for Group Psychotherapy & psychodrama.
Schattner, G., & Courtney, R. (Eds.) (1981). Drama in therapy Vo!.1: Chitdrcn; Vol.2:
Adults. New York: Drama Book Specialists. Excelleni anthology with many
relevant articles.
Seabourne, B. (1985). Pra.ctical aspects of psychodranra. St Louis: Author. papers first
privately produced in 1960s and included in Blatner's 196g and 1970 books
(q.v.). May be obtained by writing to author at 546 Oakwood, St. Louis,
63119.
Siroka, R. W., Siroka, E., & fthloss, G. (Eds.) (1971). Sensitiaity training and group
encounter-An introduction New York: Grosset & Dunlap. Includes a section
on psychodrama.
Starr, A. (1977). Rehearsal for liaing: Psychodrama. Chicago: Nelson-Hall.
stietzel, ! q, & H-ughey, A._R. (1994). Enrpowernrcnt through spontaneity: A taste ol
plAchodrymq. San fose, CA: Associates for Communitf Inieraction, S6OZ Snelt
Ave. #178, San fose, CA 95123.
Sternberg, P., & Garcia, A. (1989). Sociodrann: Who's in your shoes? Westport, CT:
Praeger.
swink, D. F., & Buchanan, D. R. (1984). The effects of sociodramatic goar-oriented
1gl" pt,uy and non-g-oal-oriented role play on locus of contr6l. lournal ol
Clinical Psychology, 40(5), 1178-1183.
Torrance, E.P. (1978). sociodrama and the creative process (#14). In Frederic Flach
(Ed.), Creatioe Psychiatry. Geigy PharmaceutiCals.

Bibliography
197
Torrance, E. P., Murdock, M., & Fletcher, D. (1995)' Role playing: Creatioe problem
soluing in action. Clubview, South Africa: Benedic Books.
Treadwell, T. W (Ed.). (1974\. Confrontation and training uia the group process-The
action techniques. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Vander Muy, I. H. (1981). Psychodrann n deux. Author: 6207 Eastridge Dr,
Hudsonville Ml49426.
Warner, G. D. (1978-1986). Psychodronm training tips. Vols. 1 & 2. Published by
author, but now out of print.
Weiner, H. 8. (1975). Living experiences with death-A iourneyman's view
through psychodrama . Onrcga, 6(31,257-274.
Weiner, H. B. (1981). Return from splendid isolation. In G. fthattner & R'
Courtney (Eds.l, Drann in therapy (pp. 129-155). New York: Drama Book
Specialists.
Williams, A. (1989). The passionate tcchniquc: Stratcgic psychodroma with indiaidunls,
fanrilics, ond groups. New York: Tavistock/Routledge.
Williams, A. (1991). Forbidden agendas: Strategic action in groups. New York:
Tavistcrck/Routledge.
Yablonsky, L. (1972). Psychodrama and role training. In L. N. Solomon & B.
Berzon (Eds.). Nru perspectiues on cncounter groups (pp. 255-265). San
Francisco: f ossey-Bass.
Yablonsky, L. (1992). Psychotlrann: Rrsoluir.g orrotitnral problents through role'playing.
New York: Brunner/Mazel. This maior book in the field was first published
by Basic Books in 1976, and then again in 1981 by Gardner Press.

Appendix A: Addresses of Maior
Publishers of Books on
Psychodrama
Bla tner (1g7 3, 1988, 1 996), Fox (1987\, Leveton (1992): Sprin ger Publish ing
Co.,536 Broadway, New York, NY 10012-3955.
(Phone: (212) 431-437 0\
Blatner & Blatner (7996), Emunah (1994\, Kipper (1986)' Yablonsky
(1976/92): Brunner/Mazel Publishers, 19 Union Square West, New
York, NY 10003. (Phone: (800) 825-3089)
Holmes (lgg2), Holmes & Karp (1992), Holmes, Karp & Watson (7994),
|ennings (1995), Marineau (1989), Williams (1989, 1991): Routledge
Publishing Co.,29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001' (Phone:
(800) 634-7064)
Jennings (1990, 1gg4), Kellermann (1991), Landy (1999\, others, Iessica
Kingsley Publishers, 1900 Frost Road, Suite 101, Bristol, PA 19007-
tSSd, (Phone: (800) 821-8312) (ln England: 116 Pentonville Rd',
London N1 9JB)
199

200
Acting-In
Appendix B: Major Books in Other
Languages
Aguiar, M. (Ed.) (1989). O Psicodramaturgo l.L. Moreno (1BBg- 1.989). Sao
Paulo: Casa do Psicologo, Revista Brasiliera de Psicodramae. A cele-
bration of the centennial of Moreno's birth.
Anzieu, D. (1979). Le psychodrame analytique chez l'enfant et l'adolescent
(2nd ed.). Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
Boria, G. (1983). Tele: Manuale di psicodramma classico. Milano: Franco
Angeli.
Buer, F. (1989). Moreno's therapeutische philosophie. Opladen, Germany:
Leske & Budrich.
Le groupe d'6tudes de Psychologie de l'Universit6 de paris (Eds.). (1969-
1970). Le Psychodrame. Bulletin de psychologie, 285(13-16), 713-999.
Special issue on psychodrama.
Bustos, D. (1985). New directions in psychodramatic psychotherapy:
Individual, couple, and group in social function. La plata, Argentina:
Editorial Momento. Spanish.
Dias, V. (1987). Psicodrama: Teoria e Prdtica. S. paulo: Editora Agora.
de Leonardis, P. (1994). Lo scarto del caaallo: Lo psicodramma come interoen-
to sui piccoli gruppi. Milano: Franco Angeli.
Leutz, C. A. (1974). Psychodrama: Theorie und practice. Berlin: Springer
Verlag. (Reissued, 1986).
Leutz, G. A., & Petzold, H. (Eds.). (1970). Zeistchrift fur praktische psy-
chologie,5(8). Special issue on psychodrama.
Leutz, G. A., & Oberborbeck, K. (Eds.). (1980). Psychodram a. Gruppenpsy-
chotherapie und Gruppendynamik, I 9(3-4). Entire issue.
Leutz, G. A. (1985). Mettre sa aie en scene: Le psychodrame. paris: Editions
Desclee de Brouwer.

Appendix
201
Marineau, Ren6. (1989). I. L. Moreno, sa vie, son oeuvre. Montreal:
Editions Saint-Martin.
Marschall, B. (1988). "Ich birt der Mythe": Von der SegreiJbilhne zunt
Psychodrann lakob Leay Morenos. Wien: Btihlau Verlag.
Matsumura, K. (1986). Spontaneity. The lournal of the Science of
Relationships, 14(1), 30-40. liokyo, Japan.
Menegazzo, C. M. (1981). Magin, mito, y psicodrnnn. Buenos Aires:
Editorial Paidos.
Monteiro, R. (Ed.X1993\. Tecnicas fimdantentais do psicodrann. Sdo Paulo:
Editora Brasiliense.
Nikolid, S. (1983). Scenska Ekspresiia. Zagreb: Napriied. Extensive bibliog-
raphy, emphasizing psychoanalytic psychodrama.
Pavlovsy, E., et al. (1979). Psicodrann cuando v por que dramatizar. Madrid:
Fundamentos.
Petzold, H., and Mathias, U. (1982). Rollenentwicklung und ldentitat.
Paderborn, Germany; |unfermann.
Petzold, H. (Ed.). (1985). Dranutische therapie. (German) Stuttgart:
Hippokrates Verlag. Contains many references of articles in German
and French.
Roine, Eva. (1992). Psykodrann lPsychodranra: Playing the kad in Your Oun
Ly'cl (2nd Ed.). Available from Author: Norwegian Psychodrama
Institute,42 Fr.Stangst.,02il Oslo 2, Norway. First edition (1978)'
Rojas-Bermddez, J.G. (1977\. Introdugdtt ao Psicodratrrn. (2nd Ed.) S5o
Paulo: Editora Mestre de fou.
Rojas-Berm(dez,J.C. (1984). Quc as el sicodrnnnT (4th Ed.). Buenos Aires:
Editorial Celcius. (1st ed., 1966).
Schutzenberger, A. (1975). lntroduction au jeu de rile llntroductitttr to rolc
playingl Toulouse, France: Edouard Privat.
Schutzenberger, A., & Weil, P. (1977). Psicodranm triadico. Belo Horizonte,
Brazil: Interlivros.
Soeiro, A.C. (1976). Psicodronn c Psicoterapin 56o Paulo: Editora Natura.
Widlocher, D. (1979). La psychodranrc chaz l'enfant. Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France.

202
Acting-In
APPENDIX C: ]ournals
Psychodrama |ournals
in Other Countries
Australia 8 Neu Zealand Psychodrama Association lournal. Editor: Christine
Hosking, ICA Centre, 167 Hawthorn Rd, Caulfield, Victoria 3162,
Australia.
Reaista Brasileira de Psicodranla. Rua Cardoso de Almeida, N"23-cj. 106,
CEP 05013-000 Perdizes, 56o Paulo-SP,Brazil.
The lournal of the British Psychodrama Association. c/o Peter Haworth, BPA,
8 Rahere Rd, Cowley, Oxford OX4 3Q5, England.
PsychoDranta: Zeitsclrift fiir Theorie und Praxis. Editor: UIf Klein. Moreno
Institut, Schickhards tr. 49, D-7000 Stuttgart 1, Germany.
Psicodrann: Reuista da Sociedade Portuguesa de Psicodranm. Director:
Ant6nio Roma Torres. Rua dos Bragas, 54 - l"Dt", 4000 Porto,
Portugal.
Drama Therapy |ournals
The Arts in Psychotherapy. Elsevier Science, Inc. 660 White Plains Rd.,
Tarrytown, NY 10591-51 53.
The British lournal of Dramatherapy. c/o British Association for
Dramatherapy: 5 Sunnydale Village, Durlston Rd, Swanage, Dorset,
BH19 2HY England.

Index
act completion, act t'ullillment, 84,
88,92
act hunger, xiv, 7 l, 83-84, 88, 92
acting-in, xiii-xv
action, xiii-xiv, xvi. 68, 146, 167
action techniques. xi, 6. I3-14,
4647,62-63, 183
action sociometry, 53
Adler. A., l4-5, 150, 153
adolescents.89, 137
allect modulation, l0l
alcoholism, 134-135
Arnerican Board of Examiners in
Psychodrama, Sociometry &
Group Psychotherapy. 163-164.
t83
American Society tor Group
Psychotherapy & Psychodrama
(ASCPP), r64-16.s, l80-182.
I titt
arnplilication. 5, 31, 75
analogies of psychodrama to
as a laboratory, 148-149
rnedicine. 14.5
power tools in carpentry, xvi. I l0
surycry. ll0
symphony orcheslra, xvi
art techniques 5 I
asserlion training, lfi)
audience. 2, 3. 24-25. 35. 96
autodratna. .rae rnonodrama
auxiliary, l. 3. 7-8, 16-27, 68-70.
74-75. t04
traine,J,20.22
auxiliary chair, 23, 53-54
auxiliary ego, .$ee auxiliary
awkwardness, I l4-l l-5
axiodrama, 133
balcony,4
behavioral practice, 91, 95-96.
100-r02. t56-157
behind-your-back technique, 6, 24,
126
Berne, E., see Transactional Analysis
bioenergetic analysis, xvi, 14, 50,
t57,173
black-out technique, 59
business and industry, ix, xi, xv, I 19,
l3t-r32, 140-141, 166
catharsis. 64-65, 84. 88-89, 9l-92,
95. l12, 103. t06, 146, t54-15-5,
179
o[ integration. 95
chair, empty, .rce auxiliary chair
children. xiii. 128, 136-137
chorus.3,7.24
client-centered therapy. l2l -122
closure,9. t07-108
coaching, 99
cognitive therapy, xi, xvi. 8I. l0l,
t73
contiontation. I l6-l l7
c()untertransl'erence, 45-46, ll6,
t68. 17r
creative arts therapies. 147, 173
creative drarnatics, .ree drama
203

204
creativity, ix, xv, 146, 148, 152-153,
t63,178, t84
crib scene, 87-88
criminal justice system, 130,
t4t-142
cultural issues, l7O, 174
dance/movement, 5, 50, 88, 157
death scene, 85-86
defense mechanisms, 79, 17l
desensitization, 59, l0l, 127
directed daydream, see guided fantasy
director, 2, 6-7, 4344,66, 68, 168
training of, v, l4Gl57
director's warm-up, 43-45
double, 3, 5, 14, 16, 28-41, 47,
7U7t.78. 156
drama, creative, 50, 129
drama-in-education, xi, 147, 174
drama therapy, xi, 12-13,47,50, 147,
t74
dream enactment,59, 80
dyadic warm-ups,46
eclecticism, xii, xv-xvii, 145-146,
157
education, applications in, xii, xiii,
xv, 128-129, 138-139
ego-building,6, 107
elderly, applications, 142-1 43
empathy, xvii,8,29, l5l, 153
empathy building, 38-39
empty chair, see auxiliary chair
encounter, xvi. 178
ethics, I l-12, I 10, 140, 163
fail-safe context, 96
family sculpture, 14,54-55, l8l
family therapy, xii, xvi, 24, 42,
t27-128, r35-t 36, t57, t72
future projection technique, 6, 8, 89,
Index
t27, t55
Gestalt therapy, xvi, 14, 20, 60, 80,
82,146,173
gibberish, 70
grief work, 130- l3l
group dynamics, I 13, 146, 154, 162,
169
group psychotherapy ix, xvi, 42,
t25-126, r35, t72, t80
guided fantasy, 6, 46, 49-50, 80, 108
here-and-now, xvi-xvii, 7, 18, 25, 66
history, xvi, 177-186
hospital, see inpatient treatment
humility, xvii, I I l, 162
hypnodrama,6,60
Hollander psychodrama curve, 9l-92
imagery, xi, 79-80, 173
imagination, xiii, xv-xvi, 76, 154
in situ,3, 128-129
inpatient treatment, l-2, 20, l2O, 124,
r33-r35, 183
international, xi, xvi, 165, 182-183
judgment scene, 85-86
Jung, C.G., 145, 150, 152-153
lighting,5
magic shop, 6,4849
management training, 3
marital couple therapy , 127
masks, 59, 147
melodrama,48
mental retardation, 128, 138
milieu therapy, l,
minor technique, 8, 74-75,9'1-98
modeling,8,99
monodrama,5, 20
Moreno, J.L., ix, xiii, xvi, 78, 149,

Index
t77-184
epitaph, 153
Moreno, 2., 18. 34, 46, ll4, 177,
t8r-t82
movement/dancet Jee dance/move-
ment
multiple parts of self, 5, 14,23,34,
82, t54
music, 5G-5 I
muruality, ll2-ll4
nonverbal communication, xiii, xv,
xvii, 3l-32, 36-37, 70,74-80,
99, t7t, 171-174
nonverbal techniques 6, 14,46, 80
outpatient treatment, .ree group psy-
chotherapy
pathological spontaneity, .ree spon-
taneity
personal construcl therapy, 98, 148
play, playfulness, xiv-xv, 43, 46, 147.
t48. t5 t, r53
power gradient in therapy. I l3-l 14
pnuis, l-57, 184
professional training, ll, 102. 106,
130-131, I39-140
problem-solving, iii. 155-l 56
props,5,68,77, 84-85
protagonist, I -2, 5-9, 25-26, 30, 42,
4849, 52-54, 64, 78, 96, 103,
t05, t67
psychoanalysis and psychodynamics,
xiv, xvi, 17l-172,181
psychodrama. definition, xiii, I, I I
psychodramatic spiral-,ree spiral
psychological mindedness, I l8
puppets. 56,59,147
205
t72
reformed auxiliary, 85, 87
religion, see spirituality
replay,97
resistance, 72,78-80.111, I l6
director's, 45
role demand, l7-18
role distance, xiv
role dynamics, 149-150
role expansion, 170-l7l
role playing, xi, XV,9-10,96,
r65-166
role reversal, 6, 19, 25, 30, 68, 83,
89-9t,93,9',1, t56, l6l
role theory, 37, 147, 149-150, 154,
r83
role training. 10,91, l0l, 157
scene setting,6748
secret pooling,39
selection
of auxiliaries,20-21
of group members, I l8-l l9
of protagonists, 52-55
sharing, 22-23, I 02- I 06
situation test, 48
skills training, see role training
social atom, .see social network dia-
gram
social interest. l-53
social network diagram, 56-58
sociatry, 155, 183, 188
sociodrama, I, l0-12, 47, 53, 96, 128
sociometry, ix, xvi,6, 178, 180
soliloquy, 5, 7, 35, 59, 68, 70-71
spectrogram, 6, 125-126, I 53
spiral, psychodramatic, 6/,-65, 96
spirituality, ix, xi, xii, 47,76,86, 132,
t4t, t74, t84
spontaneity, ix, xv, xvii, 43, 45, 52,
t48, t53, t67, t79
rational-emotive therapy, 81, l0l,

206
pathological, I l6
training, 102,170
stage, 3-4,58
substitue role,72
Stanislavski,6T
surplus reality, 76, 89-90, 154
symbolic distance, 73
systems-model, I I I
techniques, psychodramatic, 5-6
not me,98,
the worst way,98
tele, 45-46, l5l, 154
theatre games, 50, 170
"theatre of truth," 92
Index
therapy, see names of various types
touch, xvii, '17, 103, l2l
training, xvii, I10, 16l-176
transactional analysis, 82, ll4, 146
transference, 33, 45
turn-your-back technique, 59
videotape playback, 6
vitality, ix, xv, 152, 179
warm-up, 6, 7, 12, 18, 25, 35, 42-63,
67,68
director's, 43-5
working through, 8, 87, 89, 95

Acrmc-IN
Third Edition
Practical Applications of Psychodramatic Methods
Adam Blatner, MD
Psychodrama can be one of the most powerful tools used rn psy-
chotherapy. Charmingly illustrated with a wealth of case examples,
this volume presents current training techniques and shows how to
use them, whether as a complement to traditional verbal approach-
es, in individual or group therapy, in educational or community
settings, or in many other contexts. Thoroughly updated and
expanded, this third edition reviews the most recent developments
in psychodrama theory, clarifies various new psychodramatiq
processes, and features extensive new refbrences and an updated
bibliography. In this volume, Dr. Blatner continues to provide the
best practical primer of basic psychodramatic techniques.
" Concise, clearly written, well-organized, how-to-do-it text."
- Journal of Personality Assessment (on the First Edition)
Also of interest from Springer...
A CLINICIAN'S GUIDE TO PSYCHODRAMA, 2nd Edition.
Eva Leveton, MS
"Tlu clinician with even a little past contact with erperiential therapics will
fitd tltc book a valuablt conrpendium of teclniques from a major thcrapeutic
nwdcl, 
Contcmporrry Psychology
192 l92pp O-E261-2262-0 soficovcr
FOUNDATIONS OF PSYCHODRAMA
Hlstory, Theory, and Practice
Adam Blatner, MD, with Allee Bletner
An essential elaboration of Blatner's classic Acting-ln, this concise texr cov€rs
the historical, philosophical, psychological, and social foundations underlying
psychodramatic techniques. The theory of "role dynamics," developed by the
authors, provides a framework for integrating psychodrama with methods of
practice.
l9lt8 224pp 0-8261-6UO-9 sofcover
Springer Publishing Company, Inc.
536 Broadwty o New York, NY 10012
sBN 0-6etI-I[02-rt
luJffil[ffi[illilriilffil
I
9
