Six Steps to Transforming  
Performance at Work
Quiet
Leadership
David Rock
Help People Think Better—
Don’t Tell Them What to Do!
1

Figure 1, The Iceberg Model
Figure 2, Directions Conversations Can Go
2

Figure 3, The Shortest Route from A to B
Figure 4, The Six Steps to Transforming Performance
3

Figure 5, Think About Thinking
Figure 6, Let Them Do All the Thinking
Figure 7, Positive to Negative Continuum
4

Figure 8, Focus on Their Thinking, Not the Issue on the Table
Figure 9, A Ladder of Approaches to Self-­Directed Learning
5

Figure 10, Focus on Solutions
	
Problem focus	
Solutions focus
	
Why ­didn’t you hit your targets?	
vs.	
What do you need to do next time to 
hit your targets?
	
Why did this happen?	
vs.	
What do you want to achieve here?
	
Where did it all start to go wrong?	
vs.	
What do you need to do to move 
this forward?
	
Why do you think ­you’re not good 	
vs.	
How can you develop strength in  
	
at this?	
	
this area?
	
What’s wrong with your team?	
vs.	
What does your team need to do to 
win?
	
Why did you do that?	
vs.	
What do you want to do next?
	
Who is responsible for this?	
vs.	
Who can achieve this?
	
Why ­isn’t this working?	
vs.	
What do we need to do to make this 
work?
Figure 10a
6

Figure 11, Remember to Stretch
Figure 12, Ask–­Tell Quadrants
7

Figure 13, Accentuate the Positive
Figure 14, Put Process Before Content
Figure 15, Choose Your Focus
8

Figure 16, Listen for Potential
r Listening for opportunities to sound intelligent
r Listening for a chance to seem funny
r Listening for how you can sound important
r Listening to get information you want
r Listening to external distractions such as other noises, music, etc.
r Listening for ­what’s going on with the other person
r Listening to your own thoughts, and not listening at all
r Listening to see how you can help 
r Listening to understand the problem
r Listening for how you can benefit
Figure 16a
9

Figure 17, The Clarity of Distance
Figure 18, Speak with Intent
10

Figure 20, The Six Steps to Transforming Performance
Figure 19, The Four Faces of Insight
the four faces of insight
11

Figure 21, The Dance of Insight
The Dance of Insight
Figure 22, The Dance of Insight
Permission
12

Figure 23, The Dance of Insight
Placement
Figure 24, The Dance of Insight
Questioning
13

Focus of Your Question	 Example
Thinking:	
How long have you been thinking about this?
Vision:	
What do you want to achieve here?
Planning:	
What’s your plan for achieving these targets?
Detail:	
Tell me about what you’ve done so far.
Problem:	
What’s in the way of hitting your targets?
Drama:	
Tell me what will go wrong if you don’t hit your targets.
Figure 24a
Figure 25, The Dance of Insight
Putting Permission, Placement, and Questioning Together
14

Figure 26, The Dance of Insight
Clarifying
Figure 27, The Dance of Insight
Putting the Dance Together
15

Figure 28, The CREATE Model
Figure 29, Current Reality
Current Reality
16

Figure 30, Explore Alternatives
Explore alternatives
Figure 31, Tap Their Energy
Tap their energy
17

Figure 32, The CREATE Model
putting the model together
Figure 33, The FEELING Model
18

Figure 34, The FEELING model
Figure 35, The Six Steps to Transforming Performance
19

GLOSSARY OF TERMS
I have summarized the key concepts discussed in this book for easy reference, 
in three categories: the central models and ideas I developed, such as “place-
ment”; two-­part distinctions I used throughout the book, for example, “inter-
esting versus useful”; and the main scientific terms. You will also find other 
resources at www.quietleadership.com.
CENTRAL MODELS AND IDEAS
I have categorized these by chapter for easy reference.
About the Six Steps
Path of least resistance: A term coined by Robert Fritz, which I have 
applied to having conversations with others. It means the shortest distance 
(in time and effort) to get from point A (wanting to have a positive impact on 
someone) to point B (having a positive impact on someone).
STEP 1: Think About Thinking
Let them do all the thinking: One of the central principles in this book. 
The best way to improve performance is by helping people think better; doing 
this requires letting other people think, then helping them think in more effi-
cient ways, instead of telling people what to do.
Focus on solutions: Being solution-­focused means focusing only on the way 
ahead. Looking into the problem reinforces the brain circuits associated with 
the problem. Focusing on solutions is a step toward creating new mental maps.
Remember to stretch: Any time we try a new activity, behavior, or way of 
thinking, we are literally forging a new pathway in our brain, creating circuits 
that ­don’t currently exist. Doing this takes energy and focus, and requires 
intensive use of our conscious mind. Leaders can help bring about change and 
make change long lasting by stretching people, and normalizing the emotions 
they may feel along the way.
20

Accentuate the positive: ­We’re all our own worst critics. What we need 
more of is positive feedback, especially when we are learning a new behavior 
or habit. Positive feedback helps embed new mental maps.
Put process before content: Having a clear structure for a conversation 
helps move the conversation forward smoothly. We start by asking permission 
and agreeing to a context for the conversation. Then we follow the Dance of 
Insight model (placement ➔ ask thinking questions ➔ clarifying).
Choose your focus: This model helps us with all of step one. It helps 
us think about thinking, and focus on solutions, and stretch, and have good 
process. The Choose Your Focus model describes five mental frames we can 
approach any situation from: vision; planning; detail; problem; and drama. 
Having a simple, easy-­to-­remember model helps us see our mode of thinking 
quickly, and then choose a more useful way of thinking. This model has wide 
application in the workplace.
STEP 2: Listen for Potential
Listening for potential: This means listening generously with the certainty 
that the person speaking can and will solve their own dilemmas, because the 
answers are within them. It means listening for ­people’s own insights, energy, 
possibilities, passion, and future. 
The clarity of distance: Leaders can be more helpful if they stay out of 
the details and interact with their people at a high level, looking for patterns 
and qualities in activities that ­can’t be seen when we are too close. We get too 
close when we have too much detail, see things through our own filters, have 
an agenda, or get engaged by strong emotions.
STEP 3: Speak with Intent
Succinct: Quiet Leaders are succinct when they speak. They are able to 
communicate their ideas using very few words.
Specific: Quiet Leaders are specific when they speak. They are able to 
figure out and communicate the core of the idea they want to transmit.
Generous: Quiet Leaders are generous when the speak. They speak so 
that the listener can immediately understand and relate to the concepts they 
want to communicate.
STEP 4: Dance Toward Insight
The four faces of insight: This describes what goes on when you look at 
­people’s faces, before, while, and after they have an insight. There are specific 
mental functions occurring in the brain during insights that give off energy, 
which you can see if you look for them. The four steps are: awareness of a 
dilemma; reflection; illumination; and motivation.
Glossary of Terms
21

Awareness of a dilemma: A dilemma is defined as being between two 
opposing desires and not knowing which way to turn. This book posits that 
dilemmas are mental maps in conflict, and the ­leader’s job is to help peo-
ple create new ways of reconnecting their thinking through the moment of 
illumination.
Reflection: This occurs when we ask questions that make people think 
deeply. People need time to reflect to be able to make new connections. The 
brain gives off alpha-band waves when we reflect.
Illumination: This is the moment when a new map is created. Gamma-
band waves are seen in the brain at this moment.
Motivation: This is the moment immediately following an illumina-
tion. We are energized by a new insight, and have neurotransmitters coursing 
through our brain, inspiring us to want to do something. However, the effects 
of these chemicals pass quickly.
The Dance of Insight: This is the structure of the conversation we follow 
in order to elicit insights from others. It’s composed of: permission; placement; 
thinking questions; and clarifying.
Permission: We ask permission before going into a deeper, more personal 
layer of a conversation. Every time there may be an emotional response to what 
we are going to say, we ask permission first. Permission lets people feel safer, 
builds trust, and allows you to ask hard questions.
Placement: When we are having a conversation, ­it’s very useful to make 
sure that both parties are coming from the “same place.” Placement is like a 
combination of setting the scene plus full disclosure plus a statement of intent. 
Placement gets the other person to start thinking.
Repeated placement: We keep placing people in conversations every ques-
tion or so, to remind both parties about where they are and where ­they’re trying 
to get to. This helps both people stay more on track.
Thinking questions: These are questions designed to elicit insight:  
They bring about re-flection, which creates more self-­awareness, generating 
a greater sense of responsibility. Thinking questions are not “why” questions; 
they are “how” questions.
Clarifying: This is being able to extract the essence of what someone says, 
focused at a very high level, and feed it back to them in a couple of words. 
Clarifying is about identifying learning and emotions. We give people mini 
insights when we clarify well.
STEP 5: CREATE New Thinking
CREATE model: This describes the different phases in a conversation to 
improve ­people’s thinking, following the path of least resistance. It stands for 
Current Reality, Explore Alternatives, and Tap Their Energy.
Glossary of Terms
22

Desired outcome: This is the collection of ideas, thoughts, facts, and emo-
tions that ­you’d expect to have if you accomplished something ­that’s important 
to you.
Current reality: The first element in the CREATE model. Here we focus 
on identifying the landscape of ­people’s thinking, to identify qualities of their 
thinking to help them reflect and bring about an illumination.
Explore alternatives: The second element in the CREATE model. This 
is when we open up lots of possibilities in a conversation, exploring many ways 
forward.
Tap their energy: The third element in the CREATE model. The energy 
that is released after having an insight needs to be put into action immediately, 
so we tap this energy while ­it’s there, getting people to flesh out their ideas 
while they are fresh and commit to taking specific actions.
STEP 6: Follow Up
FEELING model: This is a way of following up on actions people set 
for themselves, to bring about the creation of new circuits. It stands for Facts, 
Emotions, Encourage, Learning, Implications, and New Goal.
Using the Six Steps to Give Feedback
Giving feedback for great performance: Give extensive positive feedback, 
being very specific about what they did well and what impact this has. This is 
also an excellent opportunity to use the Six Steps to dig down further and iden-
tify new habits people are developing, to help them grow and develop further.
Giving feedback for below-­par performance: Defuse any emotional ten-
sion, then use the Six Steps to help people identify for themselves what they 
have learned, and what new habits they can create moving forward.
Giving feedback for poor performance: Emotional tension needs to be 
carefully defused, then again use the Six Steps to help people identify their 
learning and the new habits they need moving forward.
Two-­Part Distinctions Used Throughout the Book
Process versus Content: When a leader is having a conversation to help 
someone think something through, ­it’s important that the leader focus on the 
process rather than the content of the conversation.
Explicit versus Implicit: In order for something to be made explicit, it 
needs to be said aloud, with words (for example, during placement). Making 
things explicit frees up everyone’s neurons to focus on central issues, because 
we are less distracted by uncertainties.
Glossary of Terms
23

Interesting versus Useful: Discussing problems is interesting. Discussing 
solutions is useful. When something is interesting, we ­don’t put much energy 
into memorizing it. But when something is useful, we consciously make the 
effort to learn it so that we can apply the learning elsewhere.
Deconstruct versus Reconstruct: Deconstructing hard wiring in the brain 
is very difficult (when we try to eliminate ingrained habits). ­It’s much easier to 
create (reconstruct) new wiring, and create new habits.
Why versus Learning: There are two types of questions you can ask of 
others. Those with the word “why” in them usually ­don’t lead to learning; they 
lead to reasons and justifications. Learning questions help people make new 
connections, by bringing about new insight.
Intent versus Impact: Sometimes the intent that we have in a conversa-
tion is not achieved and the conversation has an undesired impact on the other  
person.
Thinking versus Thinking About Thinking: Thinking about an issue a 
person has means we come up with ideas for others. Thinking about thinking 
means thinking to figure out what questions to ask that will help the person 
come up with their own insights. The leader is focused on the person, not the 
issue on the table.
Key Scientific Terms
Neuron: The neuron is the primary cell for the human nervous system. 
There are more than 100 billion neurons in the brain itself, with more than 
100 trillion connections (synapses) linking them.
Synapse: The synapse is the juncture, or main connection point, between 
our neurons. Neurons form connections (circuits) based on the electrical and 
chemical signals across synapses.
Maps: Gerald Edelman coined the term. A map is a description of how our 
neurons are connected. We have maps of neurons, then maps of these maps, 
and maps of these maps, and so on. The word “map” can be replaced by neural 
circuitry, neural pathway, circuit, wiring, or connection.
Working memory: This refers to our ability to hold information in our 
conscious mind. Our working memory is relatively tiny, holding small groups 
of about seven ideas at one time. Grouping ideas helps us remember more. 
Working memory tends to disappear after a short time; we ­don’t remember a 
phone number we dial once, for example, although we remember the number 
while dialing it.
Hard wiring: Hard wiring refers to thoughts, skills, or memories that 
remain with us for some time. The scientific term for this is long-­term poten-
Glossary of Terms
24

tiation (LTP). LTP is a form of neuroplasticity. It occurs when two or more 
neurons are active at the same time, which strengthens their connections. 
Long-­term can mean anything from minutes to hours, days, weeks—right up 
to a lifetime.
Neuroplasticity: The ability of the brain to rewire itself based on where we 
focus attention. Genes dictate the overall architecture of the brain, but within 
that structure the system is highly flexible.
Neural Darwinism: Gerald Edelman came up with this concept in his 
1987 book, Neural Darwinism: The Theory of Neuronal Group Selection. It refers 
to the fact that synapses that are used the most are kept, while those used 
least are destroyed or pruned. This on‑going process determines our neural 
pathways.
Attention: Where we choose to focus our attention increases the connec-
tions in this part of the brain.
fMRI: Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging. A machine that mea-
sures changes in the blood flow through any part of our body, using strong 
magnets. Significant breakthrough research has been done on the brain since 
the introduction of fMRI technologies.
Ambient neural activity: This refers to the way our neurons are always 
carrying some electrical activity due to internal events. These internal signals 
sometimes become too strong and ­don’t allow external signals to be processed. 
Neurons have a cap on the level of impulses they can process, and can be easily 
overloaded.
Alpha-band waves: A specific frequency given off by the brain. Some of 
the best leaders exhibit a lot of alpha waves. Alpha waves occur when we are 
relaxed and centered, and just before we have an insight.
Gamma-band waves: These occur during the moment of illumination. 
Gamma-band waves can signify parts of the brain connecting up.
Reframing: When we look at a situation from another perspective, we are 
reframing.
Phases of change: A model that illustrates how we feel when we try a new 
activity, the different emotions we experience. Knowing these phases helps to 
normalize the experience. The model consists of unconscious incompetence, 
conscious incompetence, conscious competence, and unconscious competence.
Cognitive-­Behavioral Therapy: A structured psychotherapeutic method 
used to modify undesired attitudes and behaviors by identifying and replacing 
negative thoughts and changing the rewards for behaviors.
Solutions-­Focused Therapy: A therapeutic method that assumes the 
client is the expert and has strengths and capacities that can be accessed to 
make her or his life more satisfactory. The therapist magnifies client strengths, 
resources, and past successes, which leads to the construction of solutions. 
Glossary of Terms
25

Behavioral Science: A scientific discipline such as sociology, anthropol-
ogy, or psychology, in which the actions and reactions of humans and animals 
are studied through observational and experimental methods.
Positive Psychology: The study of the mind based on researching happi-
ness and well-­being instead of sickness. An emerging new field in psychology.
Flow: Coined by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi for the zone of peak perfor-
mance that occurs between boredom and too much stress.
Glossary of Terms
26

Resources
Books
If you would like to do any related reading, I have selected below a few of the most 
relevant and important books, in addition to a full list of references coming up. 
The books are roughly in the order of how relevant they are to this book itself.
The brain
John J. Ratey, A ­User’s Guide to the Brain: Perception, Attention, and the Four 
Theaters of the Brain (New York: Vintage Books, 2002)
Jeffrey M. Schwartz and Sharon Begley, The Mind & The Brain: Neuroplasti-
city and the Power of Mental Force (New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 
Regan Books, 2002)
Leslie Brothers, M.D., Friday’s Footprint: How Society Shapes the Human Mind 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1997)
Gerald M. Edelman, Bright Air, Brilliant Fire: On the Matter of the Mind (New 
York: Basic Books, 1992)
Jeff Hawkins with Sandra Blakeslee, On Intelligence (New York: Times Books, 
Henry Holt and Company, 2004)
Joseph Ledoux, Synaptic Self: How Our Brains Become Who We Are (New York: 
Viking Penguin, 2002)
Thomas B. Czerner, What Makes You Tick: The Brain in Plain English (Hobo-
ken: Wiley, 2002)
Leadership development
Ram Charan, Stephen Drotter, and James Noel, The Leadership Pipeline: How to 
Build the Leadership-­Powered Company (San Francisco: Jossey-­Bass, 2001)
Louis Carter, David Ulrich, and Marshall Goldsmith, Best Practices in Leadership 
Development and Organization Change: How the Best Companies Ensure 
Meaningful Change and Sustainable Leadership (Hoboken: Wiley, 2005)
27

Bill George, Authentic Leadership: Rediscovering the Secrets to Creating Lasting 
Value (San Francisco: Jossey-­Bass, 2003)
Stephen R. Covey, The 8th Habit: From Effectiveness to Greatness (New York: 
Free Press, 2004)
Coaching
David Rock, Personal Best: Step by Step Coaching for Creating the Life You Want 
(Australia: Simon & Schuster, 2001)
Dianna Anderson and Merril Anderson, Coaching that Counts: Harness the Power 
of Leadership Coaching to Deliver Strategic Value (Hoboken: Wiley, 2005)
W. Timothy Gallwey, The Inner Game of Tennis (New York: Random House, 
1974)
The science of coaching
David Rock, Foundations to Coaching (Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons, 
forthcoming)
Bruce Peltier, The Psychology of Executive Coaching (Ann Arbor: Sheridan 
Books, 2001).
Positive psychology
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience (New 
York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1990)
Martin Seligman, Learned Optimism (New York: Free Press, 1998)
Philosophy
Theodore Zeldin, An Intimate History of Humanity (New York: HarperCollins 
Publishers, Harper Perennial, 1996)
Theodore Zeldin, Conversation: How Talk Can Change Our Lives (New York: 
Hidden Spring, 2000)
Journals and Web Sites
www.quietleadership.com
International Journal of Evidence-Based Coaching and Mentoring, www.
brookes.ac.uk/schools/education/ijebcm
International Journal of Coaching in Organizations, www.ijco.info
Results Coaching Systems
Corporate programs: www.workplacecoaching.com
Public programs: www.resultscoaches.com
Resources
28
