The Accidental Instructional Designer, 2nd Edition	 1 BOOK   SUMMARY THE ACCIDENTAL INSTRUCTIONAL  DESIGNER, 2ND EDITION Learning Design for the Digital Age  By Cammy Bean Summary by Pamela S. Hogle 5 KEY TAKEAWAYS 1. The Intentional Instructional Designer: Like many who design e-learning,  you might have become an instructional designer “by accident.” But you  can become intentional about designing effective, engaging e-learning. 2. Become a Learning Mixologist: Just as a mixologist goes beyond tending  bar to apply the art and science of beverage-making to creating innovative  new cocktails, a learning mixologist goes beyond text-filled screens and  next buttons to design an array of innovative learning tools. 3. Stories Form the Heart of Memorable Learning: A great story provides  mental hooks to content, making the story and the content more likely  to stick with learners. 4. Strong Writing Skills Make or Break E-Learning: Well-written content  makes the difference between boring e-learning and a compelling  experience. Write for real people—the ones in your learner population—  and keep it brief, approachable, and relevant. 5. You Don’t Have to Do Everything Yourself: Accidental instructional  designers have varied backgrounds and skills. Know your strengths and  when to find the right partner. That could mean calling in a graphics  professional for visual design assistance or purchasing high-quality  templates and images. People become e-learning professionals via many paths.  They might be good at explaining technical concepts or  have a way with PowerPoint. Skills needed range from  having the ability to analyze a problem to being able to  write cogent assessment questions, with some desktop  publishing, graphics design, and technical skills thrown  in, along with a heavy dose of adult learning theory.  “Accidental” instructional designers (IDs) may   start out as specialists in any (or none) of these areas.  IDs’ skills fit into four broad categories or “slices” of   a large pie: •	 Learning •	 Creativity This book summary is an ATD member benefit. Interested in reading the full book?   Purchase The Accidental Instructional Designer, 2nd Edition here. MEMBER BENEFITS LEARNING PIE: YOU’LL NEED FOUR SLICES •	 Technology •	 Business The Accidental Instructional Designer, 2nd Edition	 2 A “Pinch” of Theory Effective IDs must know how adults learn and remember  new information, as well as how to assess whether  someone has learned. You’ll also need to know what is  and is not effective at changing behavior, the definition  of a learning objective, and how to structure content to  achieve learning goals. A “little pinch” of theory can help the accidental ID learn  the “secret handshakes” of the profession by gaining  insight into: •	 Adult learning  •	 Instructional design  •	 Cognitive science •	 Behavior change  While most practicing IDs do not have degrees in  instructional design—in 2022, more than half lacked an  advanced ID degree—an intentional ID should do some  reading on these topics.  Design Great Learning Experiences Even instructionally sound content won’t be effective  if it puts learners to sleep. The writing, graphics,  visual design, videos, and interactivity like games and  scenarios—the elements that enable the ID to deliver  content in an engaging and memorable way—rely   on creativity. Technology Pulls It All Together IDs rely on technology to create and deliver e-learning.  That’s why an ID’s technical skill set includes proficiency  with one or more authoring tools as well as a basic  understanding of: •	 Standards like SCORM and xAPI •	 How a learning management system works •	 How to track and analyze key learning metrics •	 Simple coding such as HTML5, JavaScript,  and cmi5 •	 The technology learners will be using and any  limitations (for example, low bandwidth) An intentional ID also knows when to call in a   technology expert.  Align With Business Goals Ultimately, e-learning should solve a business problem.  The ID must consider the strategic goals and vision of  the company purchasing and using the training while  also delivering a project that is on time and within  budget, is consistent with the company’s culture and  values, and meets business needs. DESIGN WITH PURPOSE A design has a purpose and intention. Every element is  necessary and relevant. The e-learning content—what  the ID is communicating—supports the purpose and  informs the intention. A good design answers: •	 How does it look? •	 How does it feel? •	 How does it make you feel? •	 What can you do with it? •	 Does it solve a problem? Well-designed e-learning looks inviting and pulls in  learners. It may evoke a pleasing tactile experience. The   ID wants the e-learning to make learners feel a particular  way and respond by doing something specific: feel  inspired or motivated to perform better, improve safety  compliance, or avoid terrible consequences; and feel  eager to try new skills. E-learning should solve a problem  or fill a need, and learners should be able to figure out  how to use e-learning and why.  “Without having any creative talent in  our learning design process, we might  just end up with lists of really boring  learning objectives.” p. 26 “Think about the purpose of the  program and approach the content  with that in mind. How do you want  people to feel after completing your  program, and what do you want them  to do with that emotion?” p. 44  The Accidental Instructional Designer, 2nd Edition	 2 The Accidental Instructional Designer, 2nd Edition	 3 CHOOSE A DESIGN MODEL A learning pattern or design model guides the creation  of e-learning. This pattern of interactions and activities  provides structure and helps you create effective  e-learning. Using a set of learning models also helps  your team explain your approach to clients or e-learning  stakeholders, show them examples, and explain how the  model applies to their content. Depending on the learning goals, your model may focus on: •	 Sharing or communicating information, making   it easy for learners to explore a topic to the depth   they want or need •	 Building skills and knowledge, including offering  opportunities for learners to apply knowledge   and practice skills •	 Solving problems or changing behavior. By   veering into more complex problem-solving skills,  this e-learning may feature branching scenarios   or simulations Potential models include: •	 Search and Find: Curate the best content available  on your topic and allow learners to search for   and access the resources they need from within   that collection. •	 Explore the Process: Create awareness of or share  information about a new or changed workflow or  process. This permits learners to the jump around  rather than requires them to go through content   in a linear fashion. •	 Guided Stories: Build an entire e-learning course  around a story to reveal information in the context  of that story. •	 See It in Action: A demonstration that may model  poor performance as well as desired performance  and teaches learners to avoid common mistakes. •	 Sharing Expert Views: Podcast or video of an  interview with an expert or with multiple peers  who share tips or explain how they solved   a problem. •	 Goal-Based Scenarios (Branching Scenarios):  Allow learners to fully explore a topic by trying  various options at each decision point and  experiencing the consequences. These models are far from an exhaustive list. IDs can  develop their own and network with peers to come up  with additional models. THE ELEMENTS OF   WELL-DESIGNED E-LEARNING Effective e-learning requires: •	 A strong hook •	 Relevant interactivity  •	 Well-written content •	 A compelling story •	 Strong visual design Grab Learners’ Attention A strong hook grabs learners’ attention and pulls them  in. It answers the question, “What’s in it for me?” and taps  into their motivation. Your hook may: •	 Use learners’ fear of consequences if they  make a mistake or share the story of other   people’s failures.  •	 Offer a startling fact or attention-  grabbing statistic. •	 Connect the content to the learner’s experience,  job, or something they’ve struggled with. Once you’ve got them interested, you must hold onto  learners’ attention. Varying the content presentation   can help—drop in an exercise or mix up the media by  adding audio,  video, or animations. Don’t present  identical page after identical page filled with text, bullets,  and a next button.   “When you attract and sustain  someone’s attention, you get very  different results than when you force  them to sit in front of your screen with  their eyes peeled open A Clockwork  Orange style. If you attract someone’s  attention, they’re going to want to  stick around to see what you have  to say; their curiosity is piqued, their  radars are up, and they want to know  what’s going to happen next.” p. 135 The Accidental Instructional Designer, 2nd Edition	 4 The Dangers of Clicky-Clicky-Bling-Bling Adding flashy interactives and graphics does not equate  to creating engaging and interactive e-learning that will   be effective.  Interactivities in your e-learning are about making things  happen: Interactive e-learning enables learners to search  and discover, watch videos, read text, and make choices  and see the consequences. Gratuitous interactivity and  flashing bells and whistles—clicky-clicky-bling-bling or  CCBB—is not meaningful and does not enhance learning.  Relevant interactivities engage learners’ minds and make  them think, feel, do, reflect, or connect. It promotes  cognitive interactivity. It’s All About the People, Man Good writing is approachable and human. It uses active  voice and avoids jargon. Good e-learning sounds like   a conversation between real people. Depending on   the topic and the company culture, it may include a  bit of levity. Even where humor isn’t appropriate, the  tone and voice can be light and avoid legalese and  regulatory mumbo-jumbo. Good e-learning is concise and leaves the deep details to  additional resources. It’s presented in simple, digestible  chunks. And it does not patronize the learner. Write as an  adult addressing other adults, and respect learners’ time  and intelligence. Finally, good writing has a coherent underlying structure  that makes the content flow. Earlier slides or activities  build a foundation; later content uses the foundational  material to build an understanding of complex ideas   or processes. Storytelling Enhances Learning Humans are primed for stories. Throughout human  history, we’ve enjoyed and learned from stories. Seeing how a process works through the eyes and  experience of a relatable character makes it relevant,  engaging, and sticky. The right story is memorable. It  instructs as well as entertains. You’ll find the right stories by asking the right questions.  The subject matter experts (SMEs) may provide you all the  factual information you need in a manual or PowerPoint.  But you need to dig for the stories: The right questions  can reveal the reasons behind a particular way of doing  things, common mistakes and their consequences, and  where gaps in understanding or performance typically  crop up. Don’t Design Ugly Courses First impressions matter. If learners reject e-learning  because the user interface is confusing or unattractive,  they’ll never get to the content or decide whether   it’s credible. Your company’s or client’s brand plays a significant role in  the visual design of e-learning. It may determine the color  “Good writing is the single biggest  factor that can make the difference  between a learning program that  bores people to death and one that  gets them to pay attention. It’s all in  the delivery and how you present the  information.” p. 171 “Good stories stick us with context and  ooze with humanity. When we immerse  ourselves in stories, we empathize with  the characters, we visualize the scene,  and we often put ourselves right into  the action. As a learning vehicle, stories  add context and details that make the  content relevant and relatable.” p. 186  “What is clicky-clicky bling-bling?  It’s an experience with lots of whiz,  lots of bang, lots of clicky-clicky in  a sad attempt to add pizzazz to dry  content and make it more engaging.  Once you unwrap the sparkle, sadly,  all you’re left with is a load of junk.  Just because your learning sparkles  and shimmers and gets the learner  clicking on lots of fancy hotspots  and dragging things all over the  screen does not mean that you have  engaged anyone.” p.53 The Accidental Instructional Designer, 2nd Edition	 5 This book summary is an ATD member benefit. Interested in reading the full book?   Purchase The Accidental Instructional Designer, 2nd Edition here. 1092894069 “Remember, looks matter. Spend some  time and energy to give your program  some intentional and meaningful zing.”  p. 205 “A learning mixologist looks for the  right blends to support the needs of the  organization, choosing from a wide array of  ingredients and techniques: social learning,  collaborative tools, performance support  using mobile devices, self-paced programs,  augmented reality, virtual instructor-led  classes, webinars, video, live classroom  sessions, immersive digital experiences,  serious games, formal and informal  programs, coaching, and mentoring.” p. 154 palette, for example, and influence the personality, key  messaging, and tone of your e-learning.  Working within the branding, the visual design must  be clear and coherent. Visuals should guide learners’ eyes  to the essential information and convey the hierarchy of   the content. Every image should be relevant and add meaning, not  simply decorate the screens. Motion draws the learners’  eyes; animations need purpose and meaning and should  not pull learners away from key content. Use caution when choosing templates and images. Avoid  clichés and cheesy stock images. Use professional  networks and follow L&D bloggers to find effective  sources of templates and graphics, and always follow  proper licensing and respect copyright. Call on a  professional designer if graphical or visual design is not  your strong suit. BECOME A LEARNING  MIXOLOGIST Self-paced e-learning is but one tool in the ID’s toolbox.  To provide learners with access to information, offer  opportunities for them to build and practice skills; enable  them to reflect on and improve performance; encourage  collaborative learning; and facilitate independent  problem-solving. Simple training is not enough. Delivering the same content year after year doesn’t work.   A learning mixologist keeps up with technological progress,  tries out new approaches, and finds innovative learning  solutions to address business goals and solve problems.  That mixologist recognizes that learning is continuous  and social. They use cognitive science to their advantage,  adopting approaches like spaced learning and  personalization to boost the effectiveness and stickiness  of their e-learning. They move learning beyond the LMS  to mobile devices and other learning portals and shared  resources that allow learners to interact and solve problems. You may have become an instructional designer by  accident, having been tapped to turn a PowerPoint into  e-learning or evolved from classroom teaching to   online instruction. But your ID journey doesn’t have to   stay accidental. To bring intention to your instructional design practice,  network with peers, read books and blogs, attend  conferences, and learn from colleagues whose experience  and background complement your own. Mine the  resources in this book and online to build a network and  deepen your knowledge. Above all, never stop learning.  “We may have gotten here by accident,  but it turns out we like it here. We like  learning and development, we like  instructional design, and we like helping  people perform better. We think we  make a difference . . . Let this book be a  gateway—a first step on your journey from  an accidental instructional designer to an  intentional one.” p. 240