Hey Coaches, in this video you're going to see coaching by one of the InviteChange Master Certified Coaches, Carl Franco. This session was recorded by George Mason University and they have given us permission to share it with you here on YouTube. Thanks for watching and let us know in the comments what you think about this session where you would have made different choice points and other questions you might have asked. Eric, so delighted to get to spend some time with you today in exploration and discovery. Hey, you too Carl, you too. Sorry, I'm just hiding my people who are... So okay, now I've got your face. So we got to put on a good show for these guys, Carl. No pressure, no pressure. I love how you said earlier, you know, I think I got something. I think it'll be good. I think so. Yeah, how interesting that even that performance notion just always seems to be in the ether. Yeah, yeah. No, I was actually hoping that it's something that's come up. I was hoping I wouldn't have to decide because I knew there was coaching. I was like, oh, maybe I can, I can. So it's a real thing. I got a real thing. Yeah. Awesome. Yeah. We're brand new to each other. We've got about 29 minutes in our history thus far. I wonder if there are, I'm curious if there are any agreements, you know, maybe a couple of agreements that we could put in place that would accelerate our trust in this partnership today? Yeah, yeah. One I can think of is if my face gets blurry, which it sometimes does, will you tell me? Because I'm looking at you, brother, not me. Okay, I can do that. That's a simple one. That's a good one. Yeah, yeah. Anything meatier than that one? No, just like, you're a coach, buddy, go for it. Yeah, yeah, all good. Yeah, don't have to, yeah, just do your thing, man. Yeah, that's why we're here. Yeah, that's all I got. Yeah, I'm not worried. Awesome. Where would you like to be at the end of the session today? So I'm really, and I can explain it. I want to get ahead of things. But I've got this question. It's about travel. I can tell you the whole, you want me to tell you like the whole, kind of the background? Is that okay? Yeah, I mean. Okay, let me just give you the gist of it. I won't take long. Awesome. So the gist of it, and just to call this out, the first world problem, there's people in Turkey digging out of rubble, there's war in Ukraine. So this is a very first world thing. So the quick version is, I grew up in Thailand, lived there till I was 17, came to the States when I was 18-ish, and went back once, and really haven't been back to Thailand since about 96. I went back when I was in early 20s. And so since that time I've come to the States, I have happily married, I have family, I have all these kids and stuff. And I was supposed to take my family for the first time to Asia in the summer of 2020. But of course, the pandemic stopped that. And so now we're trying to decide, we're looking at, well, and my kids are like, I have two 12-year-olds, a 10-year-old and a five-year-old. And so we're like, is this the time we want to go back? And so my wife and I are looking at airplane tickets. And just the flyest there is like nine grand. And probably if we stay for a couple of weeks, it'll wind up being about 17 grand total. And so my wife is like, we can do this. And it's also my 50th birthday this year, too. So that's fun. We can do this, but is this something you really want to do? And so I'm really conflicted because in my mind, I'm like, and I'm going to should myself. In my mind, I'm like, I should. This is epic, of course. But I don't know if I'm feeling it. And part of my whole identity is wrapped up into bringing the family back to the motherland and hanging out with monkeys and elephants. And so I have to let my wife know today because she's planning summer camps. So this is all very, I don't know what the fuck to do. And so to answer your question, I would love just to have some clarity around this. It's a very first world problem. But in this space where you and I are, there is no other world, right? Yeah. So let's just release that as a pressure. Okay. Yeah. I was going to ask, what has this being so meaningful for you today? But you clearly answered that. Your wife needs an answer today. Yeah, kind of. Yeah. I mean, if we want a couple of days, it'd be okay. But yeah, sort of need an answer. Yeah. And she just emailed me how much to go on the Star Cruiser down at Disney, like the price comparison. So she's not saying, just literally while we were meeting you, she emailed this to me. I don't get pressure from her that it's not to do it. But she's sort of like, is this really what we want to do? And normally I'd be like, hell yes, but I'm kind of not feeling it. And that's really disorienting. Yeah. Eric, how do you know clarity for yourself? When you're clear on something, what's the experience that you're having? Yeah. I mean, it's a great question. I think it's, I just feel the sense of flow, right? It's the sense of just real knowing. It's really intangible. Yeah. For instance, when I signed up for this course, I knew it right away, right? I mean, it was just like, not even a question. And I kind of don't have that around this. And I don't know why. Yeah. And where do you feel the flow? Like what part of your being does that come from? Yeah. I mean, I kind of physically feel it in my forehead. But in terms of the being, I think it's just hard to explain. It's really just a knowing, right? It's just this, it's just really clear. It's this clear knowing that's really black and white. Like it's just like certainty. It's like, I will be doing that. Yeah. And of all the things in the world, this should be like the most certain. Like, I mean, to make a long story short, like this is like. Yeah. It's big. It's a lot wrapped up in this, right? Yeah. And I just, and I don't know whether I'm just being lazy or it's the money, or maybe I'm worried that like I pumped it up too much in my mind. And it just, I just, but I just kind of feeling it. And I don't know why. What have you been tapping into thus far in grasping for that clarity? Yeah. I mean, I think, you know, for many years, like, like, so I came back to the States and, you know, I was very disoriented and like, I could make them tell you a lot of stories. Right. But I mean, it's like, and this was a while ago, this was, you know, until I was about maybe mid twenties, 30, maybe. And, and it was, you know, like, that was the, like, everything was like, nothing's as good as there. Right. It was very like, nothing's as good as there. Nobody understands. Nobody is, I mean, this is gets really sort of arrogant, right? Like nobody's has traveled as much as I have. Right. I worked, I used to work for a lady and she was the first person I met who traveled more than I had. And, but I was like, you know, nobody's traveled as much. Nobody can understand. I can't really relate to people. And, and I sort of got, I sort of overcame that. It's just like when I got married and had kids, I was like, okay, this is legit. Right. Like this stuff here, like it counts. And, and so it's just really disorienting to be like, well, shouldn't that old stuff matter? Like, and it sort of feels almost like I'm betraying, like I'm dishonoring it somehow. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. What meaning are you making around this trip? Yeah. Sorry. Sorry. I knew this shit was going to happen. Sorry. I think it's. Sorry. So this is like kind of the closest place I have to home geographically. Yeah. Other than my family, which is also home. And it's, and it's like this, this kind of tug of war between those two. Yeah. I don't know. Maybe like my real home is not like my family as opposed to like this place that I haven't been to in like 30 years. And so like, maybe I don't need to go there. Yeah. Not sure. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Sorry. Yeah. I'm so appreciating. Yeah. The enormity of this. This is. Yeah. This is bigger than making a decision on a family vacation, right? Yeah. I guess so. I just. Yeah, I just, yeah, I just, I'm not sure, like, you know, am I like dishonoring that past and I just don't know. Yeah. So it's hard. And just, you know, to throw in something else for fun. I lost my mom about 18 months ago. Oh, so sorry. And so, so, you know, that's like thrown in there too. And I'm like. But, you know, maybe it's OK, maybe. You know, maybe I'm giving it too much meaning. I'm just not sure. Not sure. Yeah. What values are you wrestling with as you think about go, not to go? Yeah. Great question. I mean, I think part of it is like, I'm not a big, like, I sort of like to take risks. Right. Like, I'm a bit like, I like to at least think of myself as somebody who, you know, if it's like, if it's like, if it's like actor, not act like I err on the side of act always, even if it's scary. So, so part of me is like, wow, that's really sort of off brand to like, not go. Like, of course, why? I mean, you go. And so and then the other side of it is like, you know, I, I don't know if I'm is like, you know, I want to do what's best for my family. And I, and while they get a ton out of it, it's a super long trip. Like, it's really expensive. I mean, we'd be okay. But, you know, like, would they have more fun doing something else? Would they learn more doing something else? And so it's this sort of allegiance and responsibility to like all this past stuff. It's maybe just relevant to me versus or not even right. Because I'm not even feeling it old versus maybe not so wedded to it. There's a real should going on and I hate that word. Right. But there's a real should going on. Yeah. And it's a puzzling. Yeah. Sorry. Please. Oh, no. Shoulds and maybes. Yeah. Babies. Yeah. And you just, you just expressed how you're, you're, you know, my experience of what you said were your MO is decisive risk-taking. Yeah. Yeah. Sure. What has you curious about the shoulds and maybes in this decision? Yeah, no, thank you for that. I mean, I think it's, it's puzzling that I'm not like, just go. Like, that's puzzling to me like that. I don't have that. And I'm wondering if maybe I've got it backwards. And this is so weird for me to think about. But like, maybe, maybe the risky thing to do or the edgy thing to do is to not go. Is to be like, fuck it. I, and that's just, it's so backwards and so surprising and unexpected. Because I'm really kind of not feeling it. I mean, I was thinking about it all day today. I was like, like, I should be more. So I was going to use excitement as a compass. Right? Like, that's sort of how sometimes how I like to live. Like, I'm excited about it. Like, that's a sign that that's a thing. And I'm just not feeling like it's like, and I don't think my compass is broken. And so it's just, I mean, if I was going to follow my intuition, my intuition is kind of saying no. And I just, and so maybe it's, you know, it's like, I don't know. I mean, it's, it would really be trusting that intuition because everything logical says, dude, are you crazy? Of course you go. Like you've been planning this, like before you even got married and had a family, you know? And so it's just, it's just so puzzling. Yeah. Yeah. Sorry. Who else sits on your internal board of advisors? You said excitement, intuition. Oh God. Yeah. So Alexander's listening to this. He'll like this. So I've got this, I've got this, if we talk in terms of parts work, right. I got this guy called the judge and the judge is like Venom, Spider-Man, the guy in black, you know, he's like scary and got claws and stuff. And he's, and he's, so the judge says a lot of stuff. And of course, when I tell the judge to settle down, he turns into the guys from the Muppet show, the guys in the balconies, you know, he said stuff, but it's, it's harmless. And so, so maybe that's that guy in terms of board of directors, who's there saying who's judge is sitting in judgment thinking, well, maybe, you know, of course you're going to go, it'd be treasonous not to go. It'd be heretical not to go. Cause he's really old. The judge is old. I mean, and he, so he probably remembers the time I lived in Asia. Yeah. I hadn't really thought of that. Anything you want to ask or say to the judge? No, he's really fucking scary. He's really scary. Really scary. I mean, I suppose I could say that maybe that part just needs reassurance. That by not going, it doesn't, it doesn't have to mean anything, you know, like it doesn't have to, it doesn't have to mean anything more than I make it. It doesn't have to mean that I'm selling out or I'm being too tame or I'm not being, you know, I'm playing it safe. Oh, I fucking hate that. Playing it saves the worst. Right. So so maybe, maybe it's that part that's judging me for doing that, for playing it safe. Cause I almost feel like I'd be going like now that I think I almost feel like I'd be going into like, please, please somebody. And, and I don't know who that would be other than myself. So, yeah. Eric, if you decided not to go, what would you want to make it mean? What would you choose to make it mean? Well, I think it would be, it would be a real sign of like letting that go. I mean, there's a lot of old stuff, like just letting that go. Like just letting that go. Like that doesn't have to be my North star. Like there can be other things that, you know, are as cool as that. Which would be a big deal. Yeah. Yeah. And what would you fill that void with? Oh, there's so much, right. It could be like coaching stuff I want to do this year. It could be, yeah. I mean, it could be, there's so much I want to do like this year, like for the rest of this year, like all kinds of stuff I want to do. Especially around my business, around my coaching. And, you know, I hadn't even really, it's been such kind of a foregone conclusion that we would do that. And it was going to take, it was going to suck up so much money and so much, see, I don't have to worry about leave. I work for myself, but my wife does. Right. And so that it would just open up so much possibility. I mean, there'd be a lot of benefits to it. It would just open up so much possibility. I mean, there'd be a lot of benefits to it. It would take a lot of pressure off. I might even get a chip with my wife because, you know, yeah. Yeah. I mean, it would be, it'd be a lot of possibility. Yeah. What are you noticing about energy and use the word flow? What are you noticing about energy and flow as you're talking about? Such a good question. Such a good question, Carl. I mean, yeah, I think I feel more energy around this. The other, like to go feels like a lot. It almost feels like it would be a chore and to not go almost kind of feels like a relief. It doesn't have to mean anything. It doesn't have to mean we'll never go. Maybe it just means we'll go when like airline prices are cheaper or Hong Kong just announced this thing where they're like, they're going to fly the first five, half a million people like for free. So maybe we jump on that bandwagon for like the fall or the spring. Hong Kong's totally cool. So it doesn't have to be so like all or nothing. It could just be like, like you said, maybe, maybe not yet. Maybe not yet. That actually feels a lot better. I think it feels like we're forcing it so expensive and like talking about like going through Tokyo and it's okay. But I want to go to like, there's so many other places. Yeah. It just doesn't feel like it's right. So the energy around that I think is better. Yeah. And I don't even really think I'd have much of any regret. Like I think once I make the decision, I think it could be really empowering. Yeah. What's that judge doing right now? Um, yeah. He's skeptical. He's skeptical, right? Sounds like improvement. We went from. Yeah, he's skeptical. He's not like all snarly. He's sort of Muppet like right now. Yeah. Either tranquilizer for the judge, you know, those darts from wild kingdom with a little feathers on the back, you know, Lauren green, you know, and just, you know, that's what we need for the, um, so yeah, he's calming down. It just, I really like what we've said about possibility. It just opens up so many other possibilities. It takes so much pressure off. Yeah. Yeah. I think it's good. So how would you, how would you describe your clarity? I mean, I think it's surprising. It's, um, um, super helpful. Thank you. Um, um, in terms of the, like logically it's completely twisted, but like in terms of intuition and energy, like it, it really, it, like, I think there's clear, there's way clarity there. Yeah. Yeah. How are you feeling in your forehead? Um, yeah, it's there. I mean, it's actually there. Thanks for asking about that. It's, it's like actually like that whole, I mean, sorry, I swear a lot when I get excited, but it's kind of like, fuck it. Right. It's like, you know, it's like, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, it's just like, fuck it. It's like, like, you know, we like so much, sorry, but like so much has changed in the last couple of years, especially for me personally, but also just the world and just like, just fuck it. Like, you know, we don't have to do like all the things we, we thought we would and it could change again. And I, I just, I just think you go with that. I mean, I think that's the vibe right now. Yeah. I mean, who knows what could happen? So I think it's, I think it's right. Yeah. So as you leave this session today and leave even the class, what do you, what do you do with this clarity? Like what's next steps? Well, my wife, my wife's going to, like, I think I'll talk to my wife and be like, yeah, I think we can, I think we can hold on this and maybe have a conversation about what else we would do, what else we can do. Um, maybe have a conversation about if we don't go like this summer, like maybe we go again, maybe a time of year where it's not so expensive. Um, I mean, it just opens up all kinds of things. So I think that's right. And I really did not have this 30 minutes ago. So I, I'm really so thank brother. Thank you. Like really helpful. Um, it's good. Yeah. Yeah. Experiencing a, a, a huge lightness in you. Yeah. No, it's a sense of relief. I mean, it's, uh, yeah, I have clarity around this, like that clarity, like that, that inner knowing, like it was just, it just, it was just, I think it was just covered up by a lot of expectation. Um, a lot of should, um, it's still scary. But, um, I think it's the, I think in some ways it's, it's the, it's the risky thing to do, which I like, so it's good. Yeah. It's good. I love how you reframed the risk in this. Yeah. Yeah. The risky thing is to stay do something else. Yeah. Which I, which, which works. Yeah. That's good. Any other support you need in this? Thanks. Thanks, Carl. Like you, you really helpful. I really appreciate it. I'm glad I raised my hand. So, so am I good. Love it. Thank you, Rick. Thank you, brother. Thank you.