So, Jeff, anything that you need in order to kind of create some safety and some space here in this moment with each other? No, I don't think so. I mean, I think, you know, I know, I know everybody here and I'm very comfortable with with them and appreciative of this chance just to chat. Wonderful. And I'm going to pull down the curtains for myself so that I'm just really focused in my conversation with you. So, is there something you mentioned that you had a couple topics that you might want to talk about? Is there one in particular that seems most important to you? Yeah, I'm pondering either like just my own just kind of way of managing work and what's important or my own wrestling with like use of social media. And what what does that what does that mean or what is that my relationship to it maybe? Okay. If you think of those two, which one is drawing you as the most important of the two? Probably how I manage my, yeah, my, my regular working life. Social media is always something that's like, resonating in there. And maybe it's part of part of it, part of like the management of like the workspace life. I use it, I guess, primarily around like promoting things like this on Facebook or whatever. But it's not my favorite thing in the world. And, you know, Facebook was was down last week, was that last week, Facebook was down for like six hours. I was like, thank God. Who needs that? Take a break. Like rolling through that stuff. Yeah. So managing this sort of work, work life, it almost sounds like a little bit is the piece that seems most drawing your attention. Yeah. Yeah. What is the importance of that capacity, that, that managing of work? Well, I pretty much am my own boss of kind of, you know, I mean, I have a boss, I work with a team of people, we're, of course, given like some things to do, but like, how I'm ordering my days, what how I'm structuring things, how I'm managing things is like, all in my court. And I've, and that's, that's really been the case, you know, I was a pastor for 17 years, started a church, kind of always been like that self starter, self organizer, have found certain ways of like managing and, and I think doing fairly well at that. But I'm also finding, you know, like, just wondering how I could, like, kind of improve that that space, wondering how, like, how do I make my days the most kind of productive? How am I prioritizing? There's a little bit of everything that I'm, you know, doing from from coaching to retreat leading to trying to promote some of my own stuff along those lines of like retreat leading and coaching also happens in the context of my job. And then just getting caught in the like, I'm just answering emails for four hours and just kind of go into the next like to do they're just hitting something to just get it off the to do list. And I have this experience of you right now, like, and please correct it if it's the wrong one. But I almost see you like juggling, juggling, juggling. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. That's a great metaphor. Yeah, the juggling constantly. Yeah, what does it do? Like, what what is the experience you would like to be having at the end of the day from the all this juggling? Is there some experience that you would like to have where you where you're not maybe juggling quite so many things? Yeah, I think like, I have the picture at the end of the day, I know when I have that kind of sense of like, satisfaction at the end of the day, or able to like, look back and feel like I've as much as I'm a person that likes to be about being and kind of being centered. I also like to get I like to get stuff done. I like things done. Like, if I look back on day, I'm like, oh, this got done, this got done, this got done, this got done. And if it seems like the significant, like some significant pieces were cared for. That or, but sometimes that's not always it, right? Sometimes it's looking back on a day and feeling because I'm like, the the relational connections were meaningful there. Okay, there's Yeah, something there because I just remember last week, there were several like conversations that were coming up. And I was like, looking to get into the zoom call and get out of the zoom call, right? Like it was like, Oh, we got this half hour zoom call, we're gonna get it done. And then I got to go on to the next thing. And the half hour zoom call turned into an hour and 15 minutes. And it was probably the most significant thing of the day. Yeah, this this idea of juggling to towards moving towards satisfaction, but the satisfaction, if I'm hearing correctly, is really around how you're having meaningful relationships. Yeah, yeah, I drive a lot of my, I don't want to say value sense of purpose sense of in Yeah, in, in allowing for that space. And, and feeling like impactful relationships or conversations or experiences are being had. But at times feeling like pulled by all the like, all the dang little Yeah, this Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So at the end of this conversation, what would make this most useful as we explore the the way that you show up meaningfully in relationships? Yeah, just maybe some way of just in my own sense of going, recognizing that, how can I be present in those in those moments when they're when they're given? What makes me fully present to those moments, and not get so anxious about getting to the to the next thing or just getting this done? Because I want to be in this space with this person. But sometimes there's an anxiety of the urgency of the whatever's next. Yeah, there was an interesting question you just asked yourself, which is what allows you to be present in that moment? Yeah. Yeah. And it's being able to put aside the concerns with getting something done, or certain amount of things done, or not are being attentive presence being presence. With who's before me and not being driven by all the little things. I want to cross off the list by the end of the day. What is the experience that you have when you're in that fully present moment with another human being? Oh, it's just, and I think this is where coaching has been a wonderful, like helpful process for me. It's not like Princeton mentioned, like having his own agenda, you know, and it's, it's truly finding myself in a place from like, oh, I'm, I'm on board with whatever is happening here. I'm not trying to push my agenda for you. Or even to just like, get to the end of the conversation or like, how can we wrap this up? Like, oh, I'm just, we're here. And I'm in a more authentic posture of really listening. So as you hear yourself say that, and there's the minutiae that needs to be juggled, but there's this also this sense of this, the meaningful connectedness that you also enjoy. How do you discern when it's like, how do you discern when you need to shift your attention from one thing to another and then back? I mean, how do you make these discernments? Um, sometimes there's, there's, um, when I'm not in a flow, there's not much discernment going on, right? It's just like picking off the next thing. One thing that's helpful to me is, uh, I do have a practice of sometimes like intentionally plotting out the day at the beginning of the day and writing in all the things that are going to happen. And, but also like just understanding, like I'm holding this loosely, but it's giving me some structure and some shape so that like, you know, after an hour of emails and to dues, I can, I can let that go, move, you know, move on to the next thing. It, it does help me be more fully present to whatever it is. I've kind of like decided to put into that, that, that space. Um, I just think sometimes I I'm, I'm, I put way too much stuff into all the spaces. And how do you discern what things you need to stop juggling for? Like, how do you discern what all you're juggling? Cause it sounds like you may be juggling even, I don't know. I just have this steep Martin vision all of a sudden. Yeah. How many cats can you juggle? Yeah. And, and I, I think I want to be more discerning about what I'm picking up the juggle. Yeah. And how do you start to pay attention and do that consciously with intentionality? Yeah. That's what I want to, that's what I want to figure out. Cause I mean, I'm, I'm called, there are things I have to do. There are things that need to be done, but are there other things that can be put down or not the priority or not essential? Um, and how do I just have a more discerning space around what it is? Um, I can hold. Is there a different energy or, or experience that you have when it is something that is really important that you pick up and juggle versus when you're juggling something that you really don't even have any energy for, but you're still doing it because it's on some list somewhere. Yeah. Oh yeah. Yeah, for sure. What is that? What is that shift for you? Uh, it's just, uh, engagement, not, yeah, not feeling, um, kind of like heaviness or the weight of how am I pushing through this? There's, I mean, when it's the things that I'm truly enjoy or, or that engage me and create creatively, uh, there's more of a, you know, there's more of a lightness. There's more of a energy. Um, I think some of the difficulty around my just workspace overall right now is like, well, it's very isolated. It's just, it's me in my, in my, in my office here. I mean, I have a great team of people that I work with a great staff, but we're all kind of like isolated cause we can't get together. And, um, and when everything I've done, you know, for my job, the last two years has been on, on zoom. Um, so, and I'm a relational person. So I'm missing that, like being in the room with others and like playing off their energy and us getting creative together. It's just harder. It's harder to do on zoom. Yeah. Is it's harder to do on zoom. I'm not hearing it's impossible to do on zoom. No, cause it's happened on zoom and they're great things have happened. And I've led some virtual retreats that I feel like people really have connected with and have found it to be some good life giving space. Um, part of that, because we kind of limited the zoom, it's not like all on zoom. It was like, Hey, go be, go be for a while for a little bit of a space with each other. So I want to just touch base on, on where we are in the conversation. I know it was sort of this idea of the, all the things that you were juggling and life and then towards the satisfaction of meaningful relationships. What else needs to be explored around this topic as we're, you know, I'm looking at the time in the next few minutes. I'm not, I'm not sure. Cause I really am not sure if there's a resolution. Yeah. And what if, what if there isn't a resolution, a resolution, but maybe something to sit with as a part of the exploration that's ongoing about how you determine. Yeah. Yeah. I, I mean, I like the, the, the, the metaphor of the juggling or the kind of the, you know, or you could say that the spinning of the plates, the like, I mean, there's a part of me that yearns for kind of like less is more go deeper with fewer things and just wondering as, as I kind of look ahead, like this next month for me is crammed with like many, many things from now until Thanksgiving, but in December things kind of open up. And then looking at next year, I'm wondering if like there's space here to sit with like some discernment instead of just like, part of me is ready to like fill next year's calendar with, you know, coach trainings and retreats and all the things. And we're having a big staff retreat next week. And we're gonna be talking about all the things next year. I'm like, I just, I do want to step into that. Not with this, like, okay, what do I, what needs to be done? Yeah. You know, what shows up for me as you're saying that is almost like, how do you create the healthy boundary that you need so that you can, you can navigate this balance. It isn't like a hard line balance. Like it's not, it's not a teeter-totter, right? It's, it's a wavy gray area, but how you navigate that intentionally. Yeah. Yeah. So what are you taking away from this conversation? What's shown up is, is useful exploration. I think just for me, I just, I operate better when I can create the space to think about how I'm creating the space. Like, you know, to take the intentional time to, you know, look at the bigger, look at the bigger picture. And to be more discerning about how I'm holding that space and what needs done within it. Within it. I, I want to get back to, I used to take like a day, a month of just true kind of contemplation being away from everything. And I'd like to get back into that rhythm, which helps my discernment process. But I think it'd be great to couple that with a day, a month, that's truly like just about the intentional process of me looking ahead and saying, what's next, what's important. And, and so what action comes out of that awareness for you? Action, actions, depending. I need, I need to stick it on my calendar and stick to it. That's because it, it easily gets bumped. It's like a contemplative prayer day. And then like, oh, this thing or that thing, or, ah, well, you know, I got the contemplative prayer day. That's that space. Interesting. So what holds you accountable to that, the importance of that agreement and honoring that for yourself? Um, well, I, I liked what you were saying earlier about like trying to find that accountability within, within yourself, rather than saying, you know, oh, I should have, have Carolyn, my wife, you know, ask me every month or like, because like, honestly, that never works. Yeah. Um, but I, I, I think it's just like really like holding that space is what I am. All right. Here's the thing. And here's my confession. Everybody here holding that space is, uh, what I am telling everyone they need to do. Yes. Yes. So it's around honoring your agreement with yourself so that you're in, in alignment with the values that you espouse. Yes. Yes. Yeah. So then what's your next step? Um, it's, it's to think more intentionally about what this space that's going to be opening up looks like, because I think I want to like, kind of utilize that, that time and space well, in terms of, you know, thinking about next year and what I, I, I am a kind of process per like, I appreciate process. I think there's a value to process. And I think if I like, think about what, what my process is, how I want to honor what I value and what I am inviting others into in their own space. Um, I think I have an opportunity to, to sit with that and to be grateful for that and to be intentional about, you know, taking some days. And how do you protect that space and time for yourself so that you look in the mirror and are like, yeah, I put down that cat. I need to, yeah. Yeah. Put down that cat. Yeah. Don't pick that cat back up. Leave that cat alone. I need this. So I need to think about what, what's going to hold me to that. Cause I've said this before I've done this before. And sometimes I'm good at the practice. Sometimes I am good at the practice of holding the space. Um, so I think I need to reflect on like, what's going to, what's going to keep me there. Yeah. Is there anything else you really want to say out loud for yourself as we come to a close? Um, Oh, I just think I need to, uh, offer, offer myself the same grace that I like to offer others. Yeah. I know that this is going to be, uh, uh, I'm not going to get it all figured out and have, you know, December is not going to be the magic month and I have 2022, 2022 is just going to like roll perfectly. Um, but, but to like, be able to look back and see like where, where transformations happened in me and to know I am a different place than I was before. And I can continue to grow, uh, and to be, uh, grace filled with myself as, as I do that. Thank you so much for being my partner today. Thank you, Alyssa. Appreciate, appreciate the conversation.