Helo Kerry. Helo. Iawn, felly rydyn ni'n mynd i wneud ymgyrchu laser heddiw, felly o dan 15 munud, ac rydw i eisiau gwybod beth rydych chi'n edrych arno ar hyn o bryd? Iawn, un o fy... un o'r gwirioneddau mawr rydw i'n ei sefydlu ar ddiwedd yr wythnos diwethaf oedd cael fyfyriau, ac rydw i eisiau bod yn gryf, ac rydw i mewn gwirionedd eisiau cael defnyddio musglau, felly, wrth fy modd yn fwy, rydw i'n cael... rydw i'n gwobel, chi'n gwybod fy... rydw i'n teimlo fel dwi ddim yn ddweud ysgol o hyd ymlaen oherwydd dwi'n cael fy ngwyrion bingo neu fy ffat yn y ddŵr ymlaen o'r dŵr bra. Fel rydyn ni'n ei wneud. Iawn, ac rydw i ddim wedi cael broblem gyda fy fform pan dwi'n cael fy mwy. Iawn. Ac nawr rydw i'n eithaf sylweddol o fy mhobl. Dwi'n bwysig ond dwi ddim yn hoffi cael gwaith bywyd. Nawr rydw i'n dweud, oh gawd, dwi ddim yn gallu gwneud hynny, dwi ddim yn gallu gwneud hynny, felly rydw i eisiau cael ffit ac rydw i eisiau cael defnyddio musglau da. Iawn, felly gwnewch yn siŵr fy mod i wedi gwneud hyn yn iawn. Felly rydych chi'n edrych i ddod yn ffit a gryf ac rydych chi eisiau defnyddio eich musglau. Rydych chi ddim yn eisiau gwaith bywyd arall. Rydych chi ddim eisiau ffyrdd iawn i roi'r ffordd rydych chi'n teimlo'n hyderus ar eich bywyd i'w ddysgu fel y byddwch chi eisiau. A fyddwch chi'n dweud hynny'n fy mhobl? Yn unig, dyna'n unig sut rwy'n teimlo. Yn unig, iawn. Felly, beth sy'n ei stioio ar y foment? Beth, beth, beth yw'ch blociau? Mae amser yn ffactor mawr i mi. Rwy'n gwybod y gallaf ysgrifennu amser i mewn ond dydw i ddim, o ryw ffordd. Rwy'n meddwl y mae angen i mi edrych ar y gwybodaeth mwy. Rwy'n meddwl mai dyna'r ardal y gallaf fod yn well ar. Iawn. Dydw i'n dweud eu bod nhw'n ddwy ffactor iawn. Iawn. Felly, os oeddwn i'n dweud i chi y byddwch chi'n yr un sefyllfa rydych chi nawr mewn amser o 6 mlynedd, nid ydych chi unig yn musgliau, mae gennych chi'r bachau gwobr. Wyt ti'n gwybod, yn amlwg, nid yw'ch gwybodaeth eich bod yn rhywfaint o sylw i chi ddim ac mae'r amser yn rhywfaint o sylw. Sut mae'n mynd i'w gwneud i chi? Dwi'n mynd i ddefnyddio, oherwydd mewn amser o 6 mlynedd, bydd y llun yn llunio a dwi ddim yn gallu rhoi fy nghyffordd arno, dwi'n meddwl, ond efallai y byddwch chi'n meddwl, dwi ddim eisiau cael fy ngwaith, dwi'n mynd i fod, dwi'n mynd i fod, dwi'n mynd i fod yn anodd gyda fy hun, ond dwi ddim yn gwneud hynny. Unrhyw beth eraill, felly, anodd, anodd? So now I want you to think it's six months down the line, and you found the time you've improved your nutrition or you're not using that as an excuse of why you can't be fit and healthy, and you're muscly, you're well defined, you feel confident in your body, how would that make you feel? Amazing. Yeah, I'd feel healthy and I feel strong because another thing, an area for me is as I'm getting older, I know that we have to look after our bodies more and we have to keep our bone density stronger and all of that. So as I'm aging, I feel like I'm doing good for my body, but also I can wear the clothes that I want to wear and feel good in myself, you know? Okay, okay. So just to make sure I'm really understanding you, so you feel at the moment your major blocks are that there's not enough time, that your nutrition isn't good enough, and you know, you just don't feel good about the whole situation. And if in six months' time, you've done absolutely nothing, you're exactly where you are now, you're going to feel totally gutted, really annoyed with yourself, you're going to not have the self-confidence, and there's just going to be major regret. And if you did do something about it, then you would feel totally amazing, healthy, strong, and you feel like you're really doing good for yourself. Would that sum everything up? Yeah, and I feel like I've achieved a goal. I don't like setting something and not achieving it, you know? Oh, now you're going to be good to work with! So, what would you say your next step would be to actually reach that goal? Just one step. To program time in my diary. And do you truly, honestly believe that you do not have enough time to be fit and healthy? Are you that busy, full on all the time? No, I can make time, I just don't. Okay, so it's quite a good excuse to hide behind. Yeah! Okay, so how would you feel would be the best way of scheduling time for you? Okay, so I'm not good at exercising early morning, so there's no point saying to me, get up at five o'clock and exercise, because I won't do that. I think the best thing to do would just be, it's easy now while we're in COVID, because I've got time. It's when I return to work and I'm busy with clients and then evenings get taken up, you know? That's when I find it harder to, but what I have to do is block the time in my diary and not put clients in. Exactly. Okay, so when would you say would be the ideal time for you to exercise? Midday. Midday, okay. See, I know what I need! Exactly, exactly. And how long do you think you would actually need every day, or what days are you thinking would be good to exercise? Okay, ideally I'd like to exercise at least three times a week. Okay. And I'd like about an hour and a half to exercise three times a week. So midday, one and a half hours, and what would be your, the best days for you to actually achieve this? Do you know what, saying this out loud, you're making me just realise that it's not actually that hard to schedule it in. No. So I tend to have Mondays off. Okay, so Mondays. This is normal life, this is like normal life, yeah, when I'm busy back at work. Mondays, Sundays, Sunday, Monday, I know that's two on the chart, but that wouldn't matter. Doesn't matter, you can work different parts of you. And then I suppose you'd have to look at Thursday, wouldn't you, from there? Okay, would that work though? Yeah, because Wednesdays and Fridays I have a commitment elsewhere, but Thursdays would work, yeah. Okay, perfect. Be nice and sweaty for my clients! Lovely. Make sure I don't come and see you on those days. So, you're saying to me that you feel that time is an issue. And if you schedule it, and you have it as a goal, the type of person you are that you're going to keep to that because that's what motivates you. Okay. Midday is your best time to exercise. You're looking to do an hour to an hour and a half. And Sunday, Monday and Thursday are your best days. Yeah. So when are you going to start this? What day is it today, Monday? I'm going to start it on Thursday. Thursday, perfect. So, do you use a diary on a regular basis? Yeah, yeah I do. Okay, I was going to say, busy family life, etc, then you're more likely to. So, when are you going to put those blocks in your diary for you? Okay, I will do it as soon as we're done. Perfect. And when it comes to exercising, do you know in your head what exercises you want to do? Have you got something that you know? Yeah, so I'm quite lucky at home I've got a weights bench and some weights and I know what YouTube exercise programs to follow. So yeah, I know what to do. Okay. So, you've got all that planned. What could stop you? Nothing. Well, I could make an excuse for things to stop me, like homeschooling's overrun, I haven't eaten in the right time and it's too late, or I've got to go food shop, I can make excuses. Yeah, but if it's blocked out, you're saying... If it's blocked out. Okay. Yeah. How could you set yourself up for success? What little things could you do around those times? As a for instance, that morning, say, Monday morning, when you get up, you could take your trainers and your gym stuff and you could make sure it's the end of your bed, or if you're not seeing a client you can actually get changed into them straight away. Can you think of anything that could help you to be successful, that you haven't got an excuse that could pop up that could get in your way? I think you just said a good one. If I'm not at work, if I put my kit on, then I'm in my exercise clothes, that's a big trigger. What I think would be good for me is to write a list the night before of my actions for the next day. And if I've got it there, instead of looking at my diary, if I write a plan of my day and exercise is in that plan. That tends to work for me. I'm a bit of a, I like to know where I'm at with my day. Does that make sense? Perfect. Yeah, no, definitely. Yeah. So, and I think, yeah, and it's in my diary as well. So in my head, it's something that's got to be done. Okay. I think that's my problem. I don't schedule it in. Yeah. I think I'll do it, I'll do it, I'll do it. And then something else takes its place, you know. For a lot of people, actually having a schedule makes it real. Yeah, yeah, I think it does for me. And I don't know why I've never scheduled it in before. Just another thing that might help motivate you, you know, are there friends and family members, your children, etc, that you could really appetise that these three days at midday, you are going to exercise and, you know, if you're not, then they need to ask you why. Could you do something along those lines, just to give you that extra little bit of if I don't do it, then I'm not, I'm failing and I'm failing in front of people. Some leverage, yeah. So my son, Freddie, plays a lot of sport. He does, he's very strict with his exercise plan. So if I said to him, I need you to, I need to be accountable to him, he would be on my case. Yeah, yeah, he's a good one. And my sister, Lindsay, she exercises a lot as well. So she would be messaging me going, have you done it? Have you done it? Do you know what I mean? So those two people. Okay, so I just want to double check that we've got the plan right here. So we are going to look at exercising three days a week, Monday, Sunday and Thursdays, it's going to be midday, you know, the sort of exercises you're doing, you've got the room to do it in. If you can, you're going to actually get up and get into your gym stuff that morning, but if you can't, then you're going to put it on your bed ready. You're going to speak to people like your son and your sister to make sure that they know what you're doing. And, you know, you won't be just letting yourself down, you'll be letting them down, because they are aware of it. And you're going to put everything in your diary going forward after this call. And your first gym session is going to be this Thursday. Does that, have I got that right? You've got it perfect. Excellent. And how do you feel about that? I feel excited because now I feel like it's going to happen. Yeah, yeah. Thank you very much. And I mean, this, this is in like, we're way under 15 minutes. And we've come up with what the problem is, what's stopping you, how we can actually do it to make you accountable, a plan that's going to actually help you get to where you want to go. And you're feeling excited about it. Did you think you could do that in less than 15 minutes? No, you make it sound so simple. Like, it's almost, it's almost like when you speak to somebody about it, it becomes real. Do you know what I'm saying? Yeah, definitely. It's a little bit like, we can think something, but until we say out loud, we realise either how bizarre it is, or how we're holding ourselves back. It's like, it's like someone holding a mirror to you. So you can see that actually, you can do it. Yeah, yeah. And I'm accountable to you as well now, you see. Yes, I forgot to mention that one. I will be chasing and making sure that you do it too. Well, thank you, Kerry. I've really enjoyed our little session today. Thanks, Ellie. Thanks.