REPRINT H00WFD PUBLISHED ON HBR.ORG JULY 09, 2014 ARTICLE NEGOTIATIONS A Great Negotiator s Essential Advice by James K. Sebenius This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. NEGOTIATIONS A Great Negotiator s Essential Advice by James K. Sebenius JULY 09, 2014 The Program on Negotiation (PON), an active Harvard-MIT-Tufts consortium, draws lessons from the world s best negotiators. This year, PON honored Ambassador Tommy Koh of Singapore as its 2014  Great Negotiator.  PON has annually granted this award to a range of remarkable men and women such as former Secretary of State James Baker, Lazard CEO Bruce Wasserstein, and U.S. Special Trade Representative Charlene Barshefsky. Tommy Koh became the youngest ambassador ever appointed to the United Nations and later served as Singapore s Ambassador to the United States. During his remarkable career, described in detail here, Koh played central roles in some of the most complex international negotiations ever held. For example, he:   Led negotiations over China s recognition of Singapore while preserving Singapore s important relationship with Taiwan;   Served as President of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea in which thousands of delegate-negotiators hammered out a  constitution for the oceans  that was ultimately ratified and/or signed by 197 countries;   Chaired negotiations at the Rio  Earth Summit likely the high point of international environmental cooperation, with the final session attended by no fewer than 130 heads of state/ government that produced global agreements on forests, biodiversity, desertification, and climate change, etc.; and   Acted as Chief Negotiator for Singapore in talks leading to the U.S.-Singapore Free Trade Agreement. While most of us will not undertake negotiations of this complexity, Koh s approach offers powerful lessons for all negotiations. Koh himself emphasizes often-neglected  fundamentals,  such as: 2 COPYRIGHT   2014 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. 1. Master your brief. There is simply no substitute for doing your homework on the issues, the people, and the context in which you ll be negotiating. 2. Build a talented, happy, and cohesive team. Negotiation is not usually an individual sport. 3. Build a common fact base. In many disputes, disagreement arises less from a clash of interests and more from disparate understandings of the situation. Develop the facts of the case jointly with your counterparts. 4. Think outside your own box. Along with analytical intelligence, which is absolutely essential for negotiating, exercise both emotional and cultural intelligence. Koh observes,  The beginning of wisdom is to understand that we all live in our own cultural box. We should therefore make an attempt to understand the content of the cultural box of our negotiating counterparts. This will help us to avoid violating cultural taboos such as serving pork to American Jews or food that is not halal to our Malaysian or Arab friends. At a deeper level, it will help us to understand how our American, Chinese, and Malaysian friends think and how they negotiate. Armed with this understanding, we will able we will be able to customize our negotiating strategy and tactics to suit each negotiating partner.  Koh stresses the importance of negotiating both with your head and your heart; connect emotionally with your counterparts and make airtight arguments. This is often done best over informal meals; in Malay, this is called  makan diplomacy.  5.  Think win-win.  Koh emphasizes that sustainability calls for the deal to be fair and balanced. These five points have value in almost any negotiation. But, for those carrying out more complex negotiations   let alone those with thousands of negotiators like the Law of the Sea or the Earth Summit   Koh offers this additional advice: 1. Educate. In high-stakes, multiparty dealmaking, technical sophistication and understanding of the issues can vary widely, leading to serious conflicts. For example, a critical and contentious issue in the Law of the Sea talks involved the economic and technical aspects of an emerging industry that would mine deep seabed  nodules  made of copper, cobalt, nickel, and manganese. To help shape a shared understanding, Koh recruited an MIT team that had independently built an analytical and financial model of a seabed mining operation to give a series of influential seminars and analyze proposals for feasibility. 2. Minimize, then expand your circle. To make progress in large-scale negotiations, look for an opportune moment to  miniaturize  the process by finding a small subgroup of negotiators   not necessarily from the largest or most important countries   who are widely respected for their technical knowledge and are seen to hold the values of the group that they will informally represent. As this miniaturized negotiation begins to make real progress, carefully expand it to bring others along. For example, on a key issue under negotiation by 172 countries, Koh finally miniaturized the 3 COPYRIGHT   2014 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. larger stalled process to include only Fiji, Pakistan, Argentina, and the United States, with their small- scale agreement ultimately expanding into a full consensus. 3. Wage your campaign on several fronts. Think in terms of multi-front  negotiation campaigns  rather than specific deals. While you need to have an ultimate deal in mind, in reality you must orchestrate a series of smaller deals that set it up. For example, when negotiating the U.S.-Singapore Free Trade Agreement, Koh had a U.S. counterpart   Ralph Ives from the Special Trade Representative s office   with whom he interacted extensively. Yet, in parallel, Koh also coordinated multiple deals on each at least five fronts: 1) other Executive Branch agencies, 2) the U.S. Congress, 3) key companies and trade organizations from the U.S. business community, 4) the Singaporean government, as well as, 5) potential opponents of a free trade deal representing organized labor, human rights, and the environment. As a result, the U.S.-Singapore Free Trade agreement was successfully signed in 2004. From studying great negotiators like Tommy Koh, we can learn (or re-learn) the fundamentals as well as inventive approaches to truly challenging negotiations. To learn much more from Koh, watch the 2014 Great Negotiator sessions held at Harvard Law School here and here. James K. Sebenius is the Gordon Donaldson Professor of Business Administration at the Harvard Business School, Director of the Harvard Negotiation Project based at Harvard Law School, and Chair of the Great Negotiator Program at the Program on Negotiation. 4 COPYRIGHT   2014 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org