New Sales. Simplified.  Page 1 NEW SALES. SIMPLIFIED. The Essential Handbook For Prospecting and New Business Development MIKE WEINBERG MIKE WEINBERG is a sales coach, consultant and speaker. He has his own sales and sales leadership services company through which he provides coaching to sales leaders and sales teams. He was previously the top-producing salesperson in three organizations including Slim-Fast where he was entrusted with the Wal-Mart account at age 25. The Web site for this book is at www.newsalescoach.com. SUMMARIES.COM is a concentrated business information service. Every week, subscribers are e-mailed a concise summary of a different business book. Each summary is about 8 pages long and contains the stripped-down essential ideas from the entire book in a time-saving format. By investing less than one hour per week in these summaries, subscribers gain a working knowledge of the top business titles. Subscriptions are available on a monthly or yearly basis. Further information is available at www.summaries.com. ISBN 978-1-77544-745-0 New Sales. Simplified.  Page 1 MAIN IDEA Don t make the mistake of trying to overcomplicate the sales process. It s really clear and simple: The reality is if a company s sales team is not successful in acquiring new business, then the cause of failure has to be one of three things: The company does not have a clear picture of the right customers to be targeting when marketing   people who will be predisposed to buy because of the value on offer. The right sales weapons have not yet been created and then applied. You have to make sure all salespeople not only have access to the right weapons but also have become highly effective at using them. You haven t got into action and exposed enough prospective customers to the sales weapons you have available.  Sales  is a verb   to make sales, you need the discipline to do what s required rather than meaning to get around to it when your calendar opens up. You have to monitor and improve your performance progressively.  Truth be told, most sales teams struggle with more than one of these three issues. Establishing an effective new business sales initiative is not complicated, especially when the business has a clear picture of the market it is attacking. We strategically select target accounts. We arm ourselves with the weapons required to pursue those targets and become proficient at firing those weapons. And then we plan and methodically execute the attack. New Sales. Simplified.    Mike Weinberg The New Sales Driver Framework Step 1   Select your targets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Pages 2 - 3 It s amazing how many companies never get around to describing the type of customer they want to go after. Don t let that happen to you. If you re committed to proactively growing your business rather than being a passive order taker, create a clear picture of the future customers you plan on selling to. Selecting targets is the first piece of the puzzle. Step 2   Create and develop sales weapons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Pages 4 - 6 Once you know who you re going after, you then work at becoming armed with the best sales weapons you can feasibly access. There are an enormous number of sales weapons to choose from but the most important will be your  Sales Story.  Once you nail down a compelling, differentiating and customer-focused Sales Story, which other sales tools you should be using will become clearer. A powerful Sales Story is the conceptual framework around which you can then build your entire sales effort. Step 3   Plan and execute your attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Pages 7 - 8 After you select your targets and put together the weapons you want to use, you then have to execute the attack. All the planning in the world is academic unless you actually take the field and work your plan. When all is said and done, executing your sales plan will come down to the four essential execution activities you must do: You figure out who to sell to   your targets 1 2 You create good sales weapons which will influence those people 3 You plan and then execute your attack   you get into action 1 2 3 TARGETS SALES WEAPONS ATTACK Develop your sales business plan 1 2 Use the best sales tool there is   the telephone 3 Structure your sales calls and presentation effectively 4 Make a balanced effort to have a balanced pipeline .Com Summaries The Ultimate Business Library 8-page 30 mins dollars 300+ page key ideas We condense business books into summaries. By reading summaries, you ll get the in , so you can spend more time turning your ideas into . Learn from the mistakes and success of the smartest people in business; Get fresh ideas, strategies & motivation that could be worth millions to you; Follow emerging trends, so you can catch the wave before your competitors do; Catch up on the classics you always wanted to read. > > > > $2 per week For just , you will... Our catalog includes summaries on a range of topics for aspiring entrepreneurs, managers, and consultants. 1,000 Top Business Book Summaries Knowledge is Power   Invest in Your Future AND MORE SALES MANAGEMENT LEADERSHIP MOTIVATION STRATEGY PRESENTATIONS BUSINESS PLANS