www.hbrreprints.org The Sales Learning Curve by Mark Leslie and Charles A. Holloway Included with this full-text Harvard Business Review article: The Idea in Brief the core idea The Idea in Practice putting the idea to work 1 Article Summary 2 The Sales Learning Curve A list of related materials, with annotations to guide further exploration of the article s ideas and applications 11 Further Reading Because new-product launches often take longer and cost more than expected, many promising offerings are prematurely aborted. Smart companies give themselves time and money enough to climb the sales learning curve before ramping up the sales force. Reprint R0607J This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. The Sales Learning Curve page 1 The Idea in Brief The Idea in Practice COPYRIGHT   2006 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. When your company launches a new prod- uct, do you rush to beef up your sales force capacity? If so, consider the dangers of this impulse: most new products aren t quite ready for prime time, because they don t have the features consumers want or they don t yet work the way they should. So selling them becomes an uphill battle: you burn through cash only to generate disap- pointing revenues. How to avoid this scenario? Give your com- pany time to climb the sales learning curve  finding out how early customers acquire and use your new offering and then modifying your product and sales tactics based on what you ve learned. In particular, Leslie and Holloway recom- mend matching your sales force s size and skills to where you re situated on the sales learning curve. For example, after beta- testing the product, assign just a few sales- people to learn as much as they can about customers  response to your product. Use these insights to perfect the offering and your go-to-market strategy. Expand your sales force only after you see sales acceler- ate. By taking time to climb the sales learning curve, you start generating profits on your new offering sooner and you sweeten the odds of scoring a success in the marketplace. To climb the sales learning curve, the authors suggest these steps: UNDERSTAND NEW-PRODUCT SALES CHALLENGES In launching any new offering, you ll face nu- merous challenges including identifying and resolving service issues and developing a repeatable sales model. Adding sales capacity too early in the launch prevents you from ad- dressing these challenges. Example: Software maker Scalix developed a Linux- based e-mail system that initially garnered enthusiastic responses from CIOs. Scalix ex- panded its sales force quickly and moved to sell directly to CIOs at large companies. But it encountered several problems. CIOs weren t the primary decision makers on e- mail systems. IT department managers were and they didn t want the headache of switching to Linux. Moreover, the prod- uct needed further trials with customers to function properly. Scalix revised its sales ap- proach but wasted scarce resources in the meantime. ADJUST YOUR SALES STRATEGY AS YOU LEARN The sales learning process unfolds in three phases each requiring a different size sales force with different skills: 1. Initiation: You ve beta-tested the product and have few potential customers. Hire three to four salespeople to learn how customers will use the product and to support other parts of the company in refining the offering as well as marketing and selling strategies. Look for salespeople who:   Communicate well with teams from other functions   Tolerate ambiguity   Have a deep interest in product technology   Can bring customers together with various functional teams in your firm   Can develop their own sales models and collateral materials Example: Scalix s overhauled sales strategy involved hitting the Linux evangelist and early adopter community first, with particular emphasis on smaller targets in the higher education and public sectors (where Linux acceptance was strongest). It hired two in- house telesales reps to drum up leads. With lower-priced salespeople and a com- pressed sales cycle, the new model offered much better economics than the original approach. And in 2004 and 2005, Scalix was named one of Red Herring  s 100 top private companies of North America. 2. Transition: You ve acquired a critical mass of customers, and sales are accelerating. Keep your initial sales team focused on learning. Add sales reps who can operate effectively within an evolving sales model but who don t necessarily have the analytical and communi- cation skills the initial team required. 3. Execution: You ve developed your formula for success and put your sales force s support requirements in place. Now bring in tradi- tional salespeople and arm them with a ter- ritory, sales plan, price book, and marketing materials to take orders. This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. The Sales Learning Curve by Mark Leslie and Charles A. Holloway harvard business review   july august 2006 page 2 COPYRIGHT   2006 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Because new-product launches often take longer and cost more than expected, many promising offerings are prematurely aborted. Smart companies give themselves time and money enough to climb the sales learning curve before ramping up the sales force. When a company launches a new product, the temptation is to immediately ramp up sales force capacity to acquire customers as quickly as possible. Yet in our 25 years of experience with start-ups and new-product introductions, we ve found that hiring a full sales force too fast just leads the company to burn through cash and fail to meet revenue expectations. Before it can sell the product ef ciently, the entire organization needs to learn how cus- tomers will acquire and use it, a process we call the sales learning curve. The concept of a learning curve is well un- derstood in manufacturing. Employees trans- fer knowledge and experience back and forth between a production line and the purchasing, manufacturing, engineering, planning, and op- erations departments. Over time, the entire process becomes more effective: The more times a process is repeated, the more ef cient it becomes and the lower its cost. Start-ups and existing companies launching new products follow a sales learning curve that s analogous to the manufacturing learning curve but one that unfolds through the give- and-take between the company and its custom- ers. As customers adopt and use the product, the organization modi es both the offering and the processes associated with making and selling it. (See the exhibit  Learning Processes for Manufacturing and Sales. ) A large sales staff hinders more than it helps a company climb the curve. Instead of following conven- tional sales wisdom, the  rm should focus  rst on organizing itself so it can learn from cus- tomers and respond to them. It s important not to confuse the organiza- tion s sales learning curve with a salesperson s individual learning curve. Most companies ex- pect sales reps to go from new employees to fully productive salespeople during their  rst months on the job, as they learn more about the product, the customers, the market, and the competition. The sales learning curve we are describing is separate from, and indepen- dent of, the individual learning curve and more comprehensive, involving all customer- facing parts of the organization: marketing, This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. The Sales Learning Curve harvard business review   july august 2006 page 3 sales, product support, and product develop- ment. The improvements in sales yield that re- sult from this organizational learning process affect all of the sales representatives, both new and experienced. In this article, we will look at the sales learn- ing curve as a framework for helping managers and investors develop thoughtful launch strategies, plan resource allocation more accu- rately, set appropriate expectations, avoid di- sastrous cash shortfalls, and reduce both the time and money required to achieve a pro t. But  rst, let s consider some of the unexpected problems start-ups and established companies run into when they launch a new product  problems that could be anticipated if the sales function were viewed as a learning process. The New-Product Sales Challenge Twenty- ve years ago, the major risk in creat- ing a company (or in launching a brand new product from an established company) was the feasibility of the technology. Managers believed:  If we can build it, they will come.  Today, the product development cycle is more predictable, thanks to the greater avail- ability of subcomponents and robust devel- opment tools. So the biggest risk for most companies has shifted from getting the prod- uct to work to getting it to market. Entrepre- neurs increasingly must ask:  When we build it, will they come?  But if start-ups apply conventional sales wisdom to new-product launches and add sales capacity too quickly, the result is often disap- pointing revenue growth and a cash shortfall. (For an example of how that works, see the sidebar  How Big a Sales Force? ) That s be- cause the conventional wisdom fails to address a number of challenges involved in creating markets for unfamiliar products: the time re- quired to educate customers about the offering and learn how they will use it, the inevitable design modi cations needed to deliver a ro- bust product that will fully satisfy customers, the identi cation and resolution of service is- sues, the development of a repeatable sales model, the selection of appropriate market positioning, and the design of effective sales in- centives. Here s a case in point. Midcourse correction at a start-up. Scalix, a software company that develops e-mail and calendaring programs hosted on Linux, is one start-up that struggled to get its sales model right. The company s founders recognized that the underlying infrastructure of market- leading e-mail systems such as Microsoft Ex- change was originally designed for work groups and had never been upgraded to ef - ciently support large organizations. They be- lieved that the disruptive nature of the Linux operating system created a rare opportunity for a new supplier to enter the mature e-mail market with a solution that was more secure, reliable, scalable, and cost effective. Speci - cally, they aimed to cut total cost of ownership by 50% to 60%. Scalix launched its product, based on Hewlett-Packard s OpenMail system, in July 2003. In early interviews, CIOs responded en- thusiastically to the promised cost savings, so the company decided to expand its sales capac- ity quickly. Its initial strategy was simple: Re- cruit a high-powered sales leader with enter- prise experience and sell directly to CIOs at large companies. However, as Scalix moved deeper into the sales cycle at large corporations, the company encountered a number of unexpected prob- lems. First, it became evident that the CIO was not the primary decision maker for purchasing e-mail systems. In many cases, the operations team one level down the people who would be responsible for keeping the system up and running on a daily basis rejected Scalix s solu- tion. These department managers didn t want the headache of moving their Windows-based Exchange administrators over to Linux. And the Exchange administrators themselves viewed moving to Scalix as a career detour. The second problem was closely related to the  rst. Scalix discovered that many large companies needed to get more comfortable with Linux before they would run e-mail on it. While a small group of people trained on Linux existed in most organizations in Scalix s sales pipeline, they were not working on e- mail. Early adopters, such as Amazon and eBay, were running only customer-facing appli- cations on Linux. The third problem was of an entirely differ- ent order and perhaps the thorniest. Scalix learned its product was not quite ready for prime time. CEO Glenn Winokur explained:  You come out, and you think you have a market- ready product. Then you discover that you re- ally don t. You re 90% of the way there, but there s another 10% you have to iterate on with Mark Leslie (mleslie@leslieventures .com) is the managing director of the private investment company Leslie Ven- tures; a lecturer at Stanford Graduate School of Business and Stanford s Grad- uate School of Engineering; and the re- tired founder, chairman, and CEO of Veritas Software. He is based in Portola Valley, California. Charles A. Holloway (holloway_chuck@gsb.stanford.edu) is the Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers Professor of Management, Emeritus at Stanford Graduate School of Business in California. This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. The Sales Learning Curve harvard business review   july august 2006 page 4 How Big a Sales Force? At the time of a successful beta test, young companies typically carry a large  xed cost, consisting of engi- neering and G&A personnel. In an ef- fort to cover those costs and become cash positive as quickly as possible, they want to ramp up sales quickly. Conventional wisdom suggests that the only way to drive sales is by hiring sales reps as early as possible. To  g- ure out exactly how many reps to hire and when, most sales leaders use a capacity-planning model. The basic formula for calculating the number of salespeople needed to reach the break-even cash  ow point is to di- vide the total  xed costs by the mar- ginal contribution of an average sales rep (revenue minus cost of goods sold minus total cost per rep). The  rst step is to calculate total cost per rep. Say a software company pays its aver- age sales rep $200,000 per year (base plus commission), and a sales rep in- curs $50,000 per year in T&E expenses plus $80,000 in administrative and op- erating expenses. That totals $330,000 in direct costs per rep. To that must be added indirect costs (such as sales sup- port and management personnel), which typically adds as much as 50% of the direct cost per rep, in this case $165,000. That brings the total cost per rep to $495,000 per year. The next, and most challenging, step is to  gure out what annual revenue it s reasonable to expect an average rep to produce once she s come fully up to speed the  standard quota.  To do so, most sales leaders rely on their past experience or the experience of other salespeople selling similar prod- ucts. That works  ne for mature prod- ucts. Suppose, for instance, that our software company hires a star sales vice president from a Fortune 100 soft- ware  rm. Based on his previous expe- rience, he might expect a fully effective sales rep (FESR) to produce about $2.5 million in revenue per year, and so that s the  gure he starts with as the standard quota. Then to account for attrition and uneven performance among reps, he prudently reduces that  gure by about 20% to $2 million in average revenue per rep. The software busi- ness has high incremental margins of around 90%, yielding an expected contribution of $1.8 million per rep. So, subtracting the total cost per rep of $495,000 from the expected yield, the sales VP arrives at a marginal con- tribution for an average rep of around $1.3 million per year. Our company s  xed costs (engi- neering and G&A) are running around $12 million per year, so the sales head concludes that he needs about nine or ten sales reps to reach the break-even point. He d get these reps on board as soon as possible and promise execu- tive management that they d reach break-even within six to 12 months, the typical time required to train and de- ploy new sales reps. But let s say that our company is a start-up, and the sales VP, in an effort to be conservative about selling a totally new product in a new market, reduces his standard quota from $2.5 million to $1.5 million. That drops the mar- ginal contribution per rep to $585,000. Plugging in this lower mar- ginal contribution would lead him to con- clude he needs more like 21 sales reps. The problem with applying the above methodology to start-ups or new-category product launches, though, is that it doesn t take into ac- count the organization s sales learning curve. Our start-up would be swamped if all 21 reps were hired from the out- set, when the product was still being re ned, the go-to-market strategy had yet to be settled, and revenues were coming in far more slowly than they ever would for a mature product. Cash  ow would be strained, sending the company further into the red and dis- appointing investors. So what s the right way to approach capacity planning for a new-product launch? Start out with very low as- sumptions about expected revenue per salesperson, and increase these expec- tations gradually, quarter by quarter. Anticipate that during the initiation phase, reps will not generate enough revenue to cover their total costs. Given that the marginal contribution per rep will therefore be negative in this phase, hiring more people will merely deteriorate your cash position. Only when you see the productivity of existing reps approaching the point where they cover their total costs should you consider expanding the sales force. Unfortunately, there s no magic formula for predicting when that point will arrive. But closely track- ing your sales yield, and tying your planning assumptions to the different stages on the sales learning curve, will prevent you from wasting critical funds in the early stages. This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. The Sales Learning Curve harvard business review   july august 2006 page 5 customers. From the time we came out and through all of 2003, we iteratively worked on pilots and trials with customers and learned the full extent of customers  requirements for enterprise-class e-mail.  Scalix faced such an uphill battle selling di- rectly to large enterprises that after a few sales to small public sector accounts, the company corrected its course. In mid-2004, it overhauled its go-to-market strategy to hit the Linux evan- gelist and early adopter community  rst, with a particular emphasis on smaller targets in the higher education and public sectors, where Linux acceptance was strongest. To execute this new strategy, Scalix hired two in-house telesales representatives to drum up leads. With lower-priced salespeople and a com- pressed sales cycle, the new model offered much better economics than the original  eld sales approach. The revised sales strategy is working well. Scalix was named one of Red Herring  s 100 top private companies of North America in 2004 and 2005. Such adjustments aren t unusual when com- panies interact with real customers deploying a product to do real work and in the process learn how to better meet their customers  needs. But Scalix could have saved scarce re- sources and learned important lessons far more quickly had it delayed hiring a traditional sales force and focused all customer-facing de- partments on learning from the beginning. Breaking new ground at an established company. Established companies often make many of the same mistakes in launching a new product that start-ups do. They hire experi- enced sales talent far enough in advance of the launch to allow them to come up to speed (based on conventional sales wisdom), and then they sit back and wait for the sales team members to deliver their expected quotas. In late 2001, Veritas Software, now part of Symantec, was a large software company that sold three major software products through an international sales force of more than 2,000  eld employees. It was very good at selling suc- cessive releases of its existing products, but the company s track record in new categories was spottier. Although its signature  le and disk management software was competitive in its Learning Processes for Manufacturing and Sales An innovative product does not arise fully formed from a  awless development pro- cess. It emerges from the give-and-take between all the departments involved in its creation purchasing, manufactur- ing, engineering, operations, planning, and the factory  oor. The same is true for the sales strategy that will bring that product to market. It, too, is an iterative process, one that involves all the depart- ments that face customers. PRODUCT Manufacturing Learning Sales Learning Purchasing Manufacturing Manufacturing Engineering Product Engineering Operations Planning Marketing Product Management Product Marketing Product Support Product Engineering Sales Engineering Sales C U S T O M E R F R O N TI ER P R O D U C TI O N F R O N TI E R Production Line 1 Customer 1 Customer 2 Customer 3 Customer 4 Production Line 2 Production Line 3 Production Line 4 This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. The Sales Learning Curve harvard business review   july august 2006 page 6 features, many customers preferred a bundled hardware and software solution like those from EMC and Network Appliance. So Veritas decided to launch a new class of products, a set of software applications precon gured to run on servers from vendors like Dell, Compaq, HP, and IBM. This bundled solution would offer the cost advantages of buying commodity PC server hardware from existing vendors to- gether with a complete plug-and-play software package from Veritas. The company s initial go-to-market strategy was to create an overlap sales force that would work closely with the regular software sales force. Both sales teams received commis- sions on the new product. However, a number of problems arose shortly after the launch. Veritas had expected the product to be com- pletely developed and ready to go, but it was not yet either fully reliable or fully func- tional. This frustrated the regular sales team, which was used to selling mature products. Reps were compensated for sales of the new product but not enough to make up for the extra time and effort required. In addition, the new bundled offering was seen as a poten- tial threat to the company s traditional hard- ware partners like Sun Microsystems, making them less likely to cooperate with Veritas at the  eld sales level. Understandably, savvy regular salespeople never enthusiastically sup- ported the new product. Veritas abandoned the initiative a little over a year after its introduc- tion because the revenue remained substan- tially below expectations. Had Veritas better understood what was in- volved in the sales learning curve for this new venture, it could have anticipated and made provisions for these problems. What the Organization Needs to Learn Every business goes through a unique learning process, and each industry, company, and product has a different set of drivers. As the Scalix and Veritas examples show, the product will probably not have exactly the right fea- tures or work exactly the way it should at the outset. The sales and marketing processes may not be focused initially on the right customers. To traverse the learning curve, product devel- opment, marketing, and sales must resolve a host of complicated questions. The product developers, for instance, need to correctly de- What Goes into a Comprehensive New-Product Strategy Launching a completely new product into a new market is not just a matter of hiring an army of salespeople and letting them loose once the product is created. Product develop- ers, marketers, and sales staff need to resolve a host of issues: PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT Completeness > Features and functions > Interface to existing ecosystem > Ease of installation Correctness > Value to customers > Reliability > Ease of servicing Fit > Ease of use > Suitability for environment MARKETING Positioning > Competitive analysis > Market segmentation > Marketing messages > Proof of value proposition (ROI) > Packaging Promotion > Collateral materials > Advertising, shows, and PR > Customer testimonials Pricing > Across market segments > Across channels SALES Distribution Channels > Number and type > Channel support and training Sales Force > Sales model > Sales pitch >Training and development > Lead generation >Technical support Sales Stage > Learning > Development > Expansion This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. The Sales Learning Curve harvard business review   july august 2006 page 7 termine which features would make the prod- uct valuable to customers. They need to make it easy to use, reliable, and ef cient to service. Marketers need to correctly analyze the prod- uct s position relative to its competition. They need to segment its market. They need to de- velop packaging. The sales team needs to de- termine the number and type of distribution channels, develop a sales model, work up a sales pitch. The broad range of issues that all three departments must resolve to launch a successful product is summarized in the ex- hibit  What Goes into a Comprehensive New- Product Strategy.  When you look at the length of the list, it becomes easy to see that launching a new product involves far more than ramping up a large sales force. Gaining that knowledge, of course, doesn t happen all at once. Nor does it happen in a vacuum. It develops gradually: The company makes initial assumptions, which are modi ed iteratively as feedback comes in from early cus- tomers. The modi ed offering reaches even more customers, whose further feedback hones the product, the message, and the sales efforts accelerating the company s progress along the learning curve. This process cannot be short-circuited by sending out an army of salespeople in an effort to gather more feed- back more quickly: Many problems are discov- ered sequentially, revealing themselves only after some preceding issue has been discovered and addressed. Eventually, the company learns enough to reach a level of steady sales. The Sales Learning Curve Companies have long measured their progress along the manufacturing learning curve by tracking costs per unit the more they learn about the manufacturing process, the more ef- How Steep a Curve? Progress along the sales learning curve is measured by tracking sales yield over time. As you might expect, the curve for launching a totally new product into a new market is much longer and  atter initially than one for introducing a variation of an existing product into an es- tablished market. Clearly, the longer the learning curve, the greater the revenue gap that is, the longer it takes for sales yield to reach targeted quota levels. Setting expectations appropriately, therefore, can make the difference between pioneering a new market and abort- ing too soon. TIME SALES YIELD Revenue Gap Standard Quota TIME SALES YIELD Revenue Gap Standard Quota New Product, New Market Follow-On Product, Existing Market This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. The Sales Learning Curve harvard business review   july august 2006 page 8  cient it becomes, and the lower the unit cost goes. Progress along the sales learning curve is measured in an analogous way: The more a company learns about its product, market, and sales process, the more ef cient it be- comes at selling, and the higher the sales yield.  Sales yield  is de ned as the average annual sales revenue per full-time, fully trained and effective sales representative. Typically, sales yield for a new product starts out slowly, accel- erates for a while, and then  attens out as the product matures, in a classic S-shape curve. The steepness of the curve a measure of how rapidly product revenues reach the break- even point and then achieve targeted levels  varies substantially from product to product. For example, when the Palm Pilot was intro- duced, it created a whole new product cate- gory. The sales learning process was long and complicated, resulting in a sales yield curve that looked like the  rst curve in the exhibit  How Steep a Curve?  By contrast, the com- peting Handspring, a follow-on product in a now-established market, was launched with a  better, faster, cheaper  strategy, and its learn- ing process was far quicker. Accordingly, its sales curve is shifted to the left and far steeper, resembling the second curve in the exhibit. For many new-product launches, the sales yield never reaches expected levels, or even the break-even point, resulting in cash shortfalls and premature death for promising products. Tracking sales yield can be more challenging than measuring manufacturing production volumes and costs because revenue-generating activities tend to be less predictable than pro- duction. Still, applying the concept of a sales learning curve allows you to understand where in the learning process your launch is, so that you can deploy your sales force, marketing ef- forts, engineering support, and management time appropriately. Sales Force Planning for Launch The way to shift the sales learning curve to the left, and reach the break-even point and prof- itability more quickly, is to track sales yield over time and adjust your go-to-market strat- egy as you move along the curve. That s be- cause the sales learning process unfolds in three distinct phases the initiation phase, the transition phase, and the execution phase as the exhibit  Ramping Up the Learn- ing Curve  shows. Each phase requires a differ- ent size and kind of sales force, and repre- sents a different stage in your production, marketing, and sales strategies. The gateways from one stage to the next correspond to two markers of pro tability level the break-even point and some targeted level of steady sales, which we call the  traction point.  The initiation phase. This phase begins when the product is ready to hit the market, that is, when it has been beta tested, and lasts until the break-even point that is, when sales yield reaches a point where revenue per sales rep equals the fully loaded cost per sales rep. Typically, during this time, few custom- ers will be willing to consider buying the product, and those that do will require sig- nificant incentives. It s both unrealistic and potentially dysfunc- tional to assign large sales quotas in the initia- tion phase. The members of the sales team should be encouraged to focus instead on learning as much as they can about how cus- tomers will use the product so they can sup- port engineering, product marketing, and mar- keting communications in perfecting both the Ramping Up the Learning Curve The go-to-market strategy for a new product should unfold in three parts. The staf ng and  nancial resources needed in the  rst stage, before the product is pro table, are very different from those needed in the second stage, when the product is being re ned, and different again from those needed after most issues have been resolved and sales have reached a sustainable, pre- dictable level. SALES YIELD Initiation Phase Transition Phase Execution Phase TIME Break-even point Traction point This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. The Sales Learning Curve harvard business review   july august 2006 page 9 offering itself and the go-to-market strategy and programs. A heavily commission-based pay plan is not only unlikely to achieve sales objectives but can inhibit learning. It s also inef cient to hire too many sales reps in this phase. A small sales force not only keeps costs down but is more effective in sup- porting other parts of the company. Typically, three to four salespeople are enough to start the learning process and to make sure that the problems encountered aren t just the re- sult of a bad hire. The types of skills needed during this phase differ from those needed to sell more mature products. They include a facility for communi- cating with many parts of the organization, a tolerance of ambiguity, a deep interest in the product technology, and a talent for bringing customers together with various functional teams within the company. Salespeople must be resourceful, able to develop their own sales models and collateral materials as needed. We think of this kind of person as the  renaissance rep.  The transition phase. Toward the end of the initiation phase, companies generally have ac- quired a critical mass of customers, and sales are beginning to accelerate. Once the sales yield equals the fully loaded expense per sales rep, it s safe to assume you ve moved into the transi- tion phase. This second phase lasts until the sales yield reaches a point where company management can see that the product has achieved real traction in the market. What constitutes  traction  varies from com- pany to company and product to product. Still, we ve found that a useful rule of thumb is to consider a sales yield of twice the fully loaded cost per sales rep as the end of the transition phase. By this point, the company should have a pretty good idea of what to expect in terms of steady state sales yield for the product. In the transition phase, sales management should focus on developing a repeatable sales model, re ning market positioning, and add- ing sales capacity at a rate commensurate with the rise in the slope of the curve. The original renaissance reps should continue to stay fo- cused on learning. The people hired at this stage we call them  enlightened reps  should be comfortable contributing to a still- evolving sales model but do not need to have the analytical and communication skills of the renaissance reps. The execution phase. Once sales manage- ment is con dent that the product has achieved traction and is entering the execu- tion phase, sales reps can be hired as rapidly as the company s management and  nancial constraints will allow. In this phase, when the formula for success has been developed and all of the support requirements for sales reps are in place, the company needs more tradi- tional salespeople what s known in the in- dustry as  coin-operated reps who require nothing more than a territory, a sales plan, a price book, and marketing materials to bring in orders. The Role of Marketing Product marketing and marketing communi- cations should ideally be the center of learn- ing activities during the initiation phase. Marketing leadership is responsible for bridg- ing the gap between customers, sales reps, and the engineering organization. Everyone on the marketing team has to be knowledgeable about the product technology, able to under- stand customers and their needs, and pro - cient at communicating with renaissance reps. But success in this role requires more than just an understanding of the languages of these disparate groups and individuals in the com- pany. It requires substantial credibility to con- vince customers, sales, and engineering that their needs will be accurately communicated to the other parties. Marketing must hold the product itself to high standards of complete- ness, correctness, and  t. Once beta testing is complete, the company must decide when to launch a marketing cam- paign. There can be pressure to start the cam- paign early to support the sales effort, but that s an expensive use of scarce cash resources. What s more, it can distract the organization from its primary learning goal and set false ex- pectations among the sales and engineering groups. Worse, a premature marketing cam- paign can set false expectations in the market- place that will be dif cult to correct. As the company tweaks the product and learns more about the ways customers use it in the  rst two stages, the positioning will evolve. Marketing communications must develop a nimble launch schedule that can adjust to the requirements of each stage by preparing collat- eral materials that can be easily modi ed and by working with media and other resources so Hiring a full sales force too fast just leads the company to burn through cash and fail to meet revenue expectations. This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. The Sales Learning Curve harvard business review   july august 2006 page 10 they can respond quickly once the  nal prod- uct and sales strategies have been completed. The Role of Engineering Keeping the product development engineer- ing team intact at least through the initiation phase is essential to the success of a new-product launch. This is a signi cant challenge for both company executives and engineering manage- ment: After beta testing is done (and some- times even before), the engineering organiza- tion typically turns to the next product. Cleaning up and making sure that existing products are complete and correct is not the most glamorous phase of product develop- ment. What s more, the reward systems in most R&D organizations encourage engineers to go on to the next challenge. But when com- panies allow those most intimately knowl- edgeable about a new product to move on, they slow down learning. New engineers have to be trained, and it takes them longer to make design modi cations, stretching out the time required to ramp up sales yield. Engineering management can take several steps to provide the right incentives and foster the right culture to support the learning curve. The  rst is to introduce an organizational mea- sure that re ects the importance of staying fo- cused during launch. Companies measure manu- facturing success in terms of how long it takes to achieve scale production volumes, and they typically tie engineering to this metric as well. To move along the learning curve faster, though, companies need instead to focus engineering, as well as marketing and sales, on the time it takes to reach the break-even and then sustain- able pro table levels of sales yield. In addition, engineers who stay involved throughout the entire learning process need to be rewarded by an assignment to another big project. The Role of General Management It is unlikely that incentives will be established to keep engineers involved with the product once it hits the market without the direct and daily involvement of general management. In- deed, during the  rst two phases, the whole management team should be focused on the customer frontier, the source of learning. CEOs and division managers must direct the efforts of those who drive the learning and participate in all crucial product and organizational deci- sions concerning functionality, target markets, sales channels, and marketing strategy. Too often, executives don t get actively in- volved in sales strategy until a revenue gap appears and cash becomes scarce. But it is during the early stages of the learning curve that top management can have maximum im- pact on the ultimate outcome of the venture. Executives need to take responsibility for pro- jecting the shape of the sales learning curve based on realistic inputs and for ensuring that all learning opportunities are identi ed. Then, the shape of the curve should drive the design of revenue, expense, and hiring plans across the entire organization. The longer the initiation stage, the longer the learning pe- riod and investment phase will be, and the lower the revenue expectations should be set. The most important role of all for senior executives is setting realistic expectations  guided by the curve for investors, the board, and employees. High-tech companies routinely  price on the learning curve that is, they deliberately set selling prices low on the early manufacturing runs to stimulate volume that will underwrite their efforts to gain enough experience to lower costs and ultimately reap higher pro ts. Like the manufacturing learning curve, the sales learning curve permits you to see all the aspects of a set of activities in this case, the go-to-market process through a new lens and to plan appropriately. Applying the sales learn- ing curve as a strategic construct allows man- agement and investors to share a common lan- guage in understanding this phase of the business. And successful management of the sales learning curve allows companies to re- duce the time to pro tability and the cost of breaking even, increasing the success rate of start-ups and new-category product launches. Reprint R0607J To order, see the next page or call 800-988-0886 or 617-783-7500 or go to www.hbrreprints.org  You come out, and you think you have a market- ready product. Then you discover that you really don t.  This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. The Sales Learning Curve To Order For Harvard Business Review reprints and subscriptions, call 800-988-0886 or 617-783-7500. Go to www.hbrreprints.org For customized and quantity orders of Harvard Business Review article reprints, call 617-783-7626, or e-mai customizations@hbsp.harvard.edu page 11 Further Reading A R T I C L E Match Your Sales Force Structure to Your Business Life Cycle by Andris A. Zoltners, Prabhakant Sinha, and Sally E. Lorimer Harvard Business Review July August 2006 Product no. R0607F Once you ve moved from the new product phase to more mature phases in your prod- uct life cycle, your sales force structure must change again. Factors to modify include: the roles that internal salespeople and external selling partners play; the size of your sales force; the degree of your sale force s specializa- tion; and the way salespeople apportion their efforts among different customers, products, and activities. By adjusting these factors, you enable your sales force to re- spond quickly to market opportunities, en- hance their performance, and maintain your company s profitability. The authors agree that during the launch and growth phases of a new product, com- panies need to focus on assembling the right size sales force, determining whether they can depend on selling partners, and getting the sales force s degree of specialization right. But when a new offering reaches matu- rity, firms must hire more general-purpose salespeople. When a product goes into de- cline, effective sales leaders then reduce the size of the sales force and use external distri- bution channels to keep the offering afloat for as long as possible. This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org