1 The Essential Principles of Presentation Design THE ESSENTIAL PRINCIPLES OF PRESENTATION DESIGN 2 The Essential Principles of Presentation Design Presentations mean a lot of things to many people, for some people it is simply a stack of slides with text and images on it, for others, it is a great storytelling medium that has the power to influence the audience s decisions or change the preconceived notions and perceptions of the audience. Irrespective of the meaning that works best for you, the reality of presentations is that they are an integral part of business and a visual storytelling medium that you can use to tell a story or share an idea or concept with your audience to educate them or persuade them to achieve your goals. A good way to create a beautiful, powerful, compelling, and results-driven presentation is by effectively combining visual design elements, fantastic content, and functionality to work together to achieve your goals. This is major because what we see and how we see it play a big role in how we interpret new information and how best we can remember it. A visually attractive presentation design is important because it can help you envelop your ideas, narrative, visuals, data, and statistics in one place and aid the successful storytelling that helps you share your point of view, grow your business and get your audience to see, hear and understand your visions loud and clear. There are certain principles that you need to put in place when creating your presentation design. However, before we get to that, here are the reasons why presentations exist in the first place and why it s useful. 2 3 The Essential Principles of Presentation Design 3 4 The Essential Principles of Presentation Design 4 PURPOSE OF PRESENTATIONS Presentations are useful for the following reasons; 1. To Inform Presentations contain new and up-to-date information about different subjects, topics, and fields that impart new, impactful and life-changing knowledge to an audience. 5 The Essential Principles of Presentation Design 5 2. To Entertain If designed and organized properly with the right design elements and media, presentations are capable of captivating an audience s imagination and making them understand the value of the information they are learning. 3. To Instruct A properly researched and designed presentation slides provide practical guidance and instruction for the application of the knowledge shared with the audience. So aside from providing your audience with the right information, presentations also educate them on the different ways they can use the information. 4. To Activate A distinct factor that makes presentations unique is their ability to move the audience to take action based on the information and analysis given to them. Essentially, the presentation s audiences can internally assess the information to decide on their next line of action. 5. To Inspire A well-crafted and organized presentation has the power to arouse feelings that can influence an audience s behavior. Usually, business and sustainability-related presentations evoke such emotions in their audiences. 6. To Persuade Usually, presentations appeal to the audience s emotions, logic, or both to convince the audience to act on the information, facts, figures, and opportunities provided in the presentation slides. 6 The Essential Principles of Presentation Design 10 ESSENTIAL PRINCIPLES OF PRESENTATION DESIGN As explained above, presentations have the power and visual appeal to captivate the audience and evoke certain emotions in them. However, to achieve this and many more, you need to put certain principles in place. Here are the 10 essential principles that very successful and engaging presentation designs must have. 1. Adhere to Visual Hierarchy One of the most crucial principles of a good presentation design that most presenters overlook is visual hierarchy. In the simplest terms, visual hierarchy in design is the principle of arranging design elements logically and strategically to show their order of importance. Essentially, graphic designers use this to structure visual characteristics or elements of a presentation to influence the audience s perception and guide them to take desired actions. You must achieve visual hierarchy in your design because it contributes to the visual appeal and attractiveness of your presentation design. Beyond this, it also influences the order in which your audience views your content to aid comprehension, impact, and value. 7 The Essential Principles of Presentation Design 2. Audience Research is Key Your presentation audience is very important to the success of your presentation. Since the whole essence of preparing the presentation slide is to inform, educate, inspire, instruct or evoke a feeling or emotion in them, you must research your audience to know them. Audience research refers to the study of the people you intend to create the presentation slides for. Usually, this research helps you understand the size, characteristics, needs, and goals of the group of people who make up your target audience. Once you understand this set of people, what they like, and what can gain their attention, you will be well informed to include all the elements in your presentation design. Additionally, research by the World Health Organization found that at least 2.2 billion people in the world have some form of visual impairment. For this reason, adding an innovative design that does not sit well with your audience can affect the success of such presentations - a bigger reason why you must effectively research your audience to know what works for them. 8 The Essential Principles of Presentation Design 3. Use the Right Fonts One of the most important principles of a presentation design that you should never overlook is your choice of font. Typography serves to fulfill two key purposes in your presentation design, the first is to enhance the legibility and readability of the presentation design and the second purpose is to help communicate the messaging, tone, and sentiments of the presentation design. Your choice of fonts enhances the aesthetics of the presentation design and helps make it look visually attractive, clean, and easy on the eyes. While there is no laid-out rule on the exact fonts you should use, the focus should be on enhancing the readability and visual appeal of the presentation. Consider a minimum of a 12-point font for the body text (14 -16 point maximum) and around 36-point for main headlines. For fonts, try using safe fonts Arial or Helvetica for clarity. Helvetica Open Sans Arial Roboto Gill Sans 9 The Essential Principles of Presentation Design 4. Pick the Right Colors Color is by far one of the most important design elements that you can t afford to get wrong in your presentation design. According to research by the Institute for Color Research, they discovered that people make a subconscious judgment about an environment or product within 90 seconds of initial viewing, and between 62% and 90% of that assessment is based on color alone. Color is powerful in presentations that can give meaning to your design, elevate your content, attract your audience and spur their emotions. Your focus when choosing colors for your presentation design should not just be on how pretty or vibrant it is, but more on how it can help you achieve your goals or purpose. Since people can draw meanings and connections from colors, leverage the right colors to help your audience better understand the message you are passing. 10 The Essential Principles of Presentation Design 5. Choose Professional, Inspiring Images Images are known to uplift the aesthetics and appeal of presentation designs which makes them an important principle you need to get right. According to Forbes, 65% of people are visual learners. The implication of this is that people are most drawn to high-quality, impactful images compared to plain documents. Images are an emotional, influential, and persuasive tool that is capable of increasing a message s memorability and improving audience engagement with the presentation. Since the human brain is wired to process images quickly, audiences are most likely to be attracted to and interact better with images faster than text in a presentation, which is another reason why you need high-quality, impactful images in your presentations. Beyond this, images are a powerful tool that captures complex and abstract concepts and breaks them down to help the audience understand them better. 11 The Essential Principles of Presentation Design 6. Use Grids to Layout Your Content Adding a grid design in a presentation is a great way to attract the attention of your audience without having to forgo any important information. A badly proportioned and poorly-aligned presentation slide can make the audience lose interest in the presentation message. Considering how detrimental the loss of interest is to the success of the presentation, try using grids to align and arrange your presentation elements such as the logo, body text, headlines, images, and other content. Doing this will not only help you combine different elements seamlessly, but will also help you achieve a neat, consistent, and well-balanced look in your presentations. 12 The Essential Principles of Presentation Design 7. Make good use of whitespaces Whitespace or negative space is a key principle in design that can help you achieve a clean, minimal, and elegant design. One of the biggest mistakes you can ever make is packing up your presentation design with too much information in one slide. Aside from making it hard for your audience to read your slides, it can also make them lose interest. Adding enough white space to your presentation design can help you build focal points that can guide your audience through the presentation and help you give priority to certain elements in the design. 8. Use animation in moderation Considering how easy it is for the audience to lose interest in a presentation, designers are always on the lookout for more creative and engaging ways to engage the audience all through the presentation. One of these innovative ways is using animations. Animations help to make presentations more dynamic & enhance memorability. Irrespective of the animation effects you choose to add to your presentation, ensure that it s not random to avoid unprofessional designs and make sure it s purposeful and you re not just using it for the sake of it. 13 The Essential Principles of Presentation Design 9. Consider using visual storytelling There is something that sets presentations different from other documents, and this is their power of storytelling. It s mainly the ability to creatively move your audience from one point to another without losing them at any point in the slides. Using visuals such as images and design, you can connect with the emotions of your audience while also conveying meaningful information. 10. Repetition Repetition otherwise known as consistency is about repeating different elements in your presentation to enhance its visual appeal and emphasize the importance of certain elements in your presentation. If used properly, you can use repetition to draw your audience s attention to certain texts or elements and help them acquire new knowledge without being obstructive. Putting It All Together To Make It Work Presentations are powerful visual storytelling tools that you can use to share information with your audience to drive them to take action. As much as the content is very important to get the information across to your audience, the presentation design is the tool that will help you achieve your goals. A professional and compelling design will not only support your content but also help you convey your message in the right manner to help you drive your desired action. By following the above principles, you will be able to create clean, beautiful, and innovative presentation designs that will help you attract the attention of your audience and positively reflect on your brand and company.