Digital Article Presentation Skills Disarm Your Audience When You Present Get ready for a fight, though you might not have one. by Nancy Duarte This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. Disarm Your Audience When You Present Get ready for a fight, though you might not have one. by Nancy Duarte Published on HBR.org / November 12, 2012 / Reprint H009OO When you walk into a room as a presenter, it s easy to feel as if you re the central figure: You re up front, and people came to hear you. In reality, though, you re not the star of the show. The audience is. It s in their power to embrace   or reject   your ideas. You re presenting because you need them to change their beliefs or behavior in some way, and people find it hard to change. So expect them to resist. Resistance doesn t have to be a bad thing. In fact, if you prepare for it, you ll sharpen your presentation and stand a much better chance of winning your audience over. By considering different points of view and addressing doubts and fears before they become roadblocks, you ll demonstrate an open mind   and invite your audience to respond in kind. Here are the most common types of resistance and some tips on getting ready for them: Logical resistance: As you plan your presentation, try to come up with arguments against your perspective. Familiarize yourself with alternate lines of reasoning by digging up articles, blog posts, and reports that challenge your stance. This kind of research will prepare you for skeptical questions and comments   and it ll help you develop a deeper understanding of the topic and a more nuanced point of view. HBR / Digital Article / Disarm Your Audience When You Present Copyright   2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved. 1 This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. Emotional resistance: Does your audience hold fast to a bias, dogma, or moral code   and do your ideas violate that in some way? Hitting raw nerves will set people off. So look at things from their perspective, and proceed carefully. If, for example, you re at a medical conference launching a new HPV vaccination for kids, emphasize the importance of abstinence in youth. Practical resistance: Is it physically or geographically difficult for the audience to do what you re asking? Acknowledge any sacrifices they re making, and show that you re shouldering some of the burden yourself. Suppose you re asking your team to work nights and weekends to meet a tight deadline. Explain that you ll be in 24/7 mode, too, until the big project is wrapped up   and that everyone will get comp time afterward. Anticipating resistance forces you to really think about the people you re presenting to, and that makes it easier to influence them. If you ve made a sincere effort to look at the world through their eyes, it will show when you speak. You ll feel more warmly toward them, so you ll take on a conversational tone. You ll sound   and be   authentic when you address their concerns. As a result, you ll disarm them, and they ll be more likely to accept your message. If you re struggling to figure out what kinds of resistance you ll face, share your ideas with others before you present and ask them to pressure-test the content. You may be so deeply connected to your own perspective that you re having a hard time anticipating other points of view. Use your boss as a sounding board as you prepare to speak to the executive committee, for example. Or ask a colleague for a reality check before you present to other managers in her group. HBR / Digital Article / Disarm Your Audience When You Present Copyright   2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved. 2 This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. Always remember that the people in your audience get to determine whether your idea spreads or dies. You need them more than they need you. So be humble in your approach. Their desires and goals   and their frustrations and anxieties   should shape everything you present. This is the fifth post in Nancy Duarte s blog series on creating and delivering presentations, based on tips from her new book, the HBR Guide to Persuasive Presentations. Read the other posts here: Post #1: How to Present to Senior Executives Post #2: Create a Presentation Your Audience Will Care About Post #3: Do Your Slides Pass the Glance Test Post #4: Structure Your Presentation Like a Story This article was originally published online on November 12, 2012. ND Nancy Duarte is a best-selling author with thirty years of CEO-ing under her belt. She s driven her firm, Duarte, Inc., to be the global leader behind some of the most influential messages and visuals in business and culture. Duarte, Inc., is the largest design firm in Silicon Valley, as well as one of the top woman-owned businesses in the area. Nancy has written six best-selling books, four have won awards, and her new book, DataStory: Explain Data and Inspire Action Through Story, is available now. Follow Duarte on Twitter: @nancyduarte or LinkedIn. HBR / Digital Article / Disarm Your Audience When You Present Copyright   2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved. 3 This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org