Digital Article Business Communication Your Business Needs Insight, Not Just Pretty Pictures Introducing our month-long series on data visualization. by Scott Berinato This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. Your Business Needs Insight, Not Just Pretty Pictures Introducing our month-long series on data visualization. by Scott Berinato Published on HBR.org / March 19, 2013 / Reprint H00AC1 In 2007, if you were a Starbucks shareholder and you opened your annual financial report, the first meaningful information you encountered was this: HBR / Digital Article / Your Business Needs Insight, Not Just Pretty Pictures Copyright   2013 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved. 1 This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. And if you read the  narrative  annual report from that year, the first thing you saw was this: Last year, if you were a Starbucks shareholder, you only received one annual report, and the very first page after the cover began with this: HBR / Digital Article / Your Business Needs Insight, Not Just Pretty Pictures Copyright   2013 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved. 2 This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. The evolution of annual reports represents a broader trend in business communication: Data comes first, and it s incresingly visual. Welcome to the Visualizing Data Insight Center, where for the next month we ll explore the broadening role data visualization plays in business communication. We believe this is not only an inevitable trend, but one you must embrace if you want to effectively communicate with all of your stakeholders. Data visualization is taking hold now because of two trends. The first: big data is here, it must be analyzed, and one of the best ways to make sense of it is with visual representations. And two, the tools to create good data visualizations are being democratized, which has led to a growing community of programmers, designers, and statisticians who can apply their analytical and intuitive powers to creating meaningful visual stories. HBR / Digital Article / Your Business Needs Insight, Not Just Pretty Pictures Copyright   2013 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved. 3 This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. We ve already declared the data scientist to be the sexiest job of the 21st century. Those scientists will need visualization experts the way writers need editors. While we ll be sharing some stunning visuals over the next month, this Insight Center is not just focused on pretty pictures. Our aim is to get you acquainted with this burgeoning discipline, emphasizing how and when you can practically apply visualization in order to be a more effective communicator. We ll cover everything from the basic   how you can improve PowerPoint slides using visualization   to the advanced ways graphics can make sense of big data sets. We ll also share our contributors  and editors  favorite visualizations with explanations of why they find them so useful. And, of course, we ll share some all-time bad examples as cautionary tales. We also want to know what your favorite   or least favorite   data visualizations are. You can email me, or post links in the comments. We re kicking the Insight Center off today with a good mix of introductory content. Designer and art director Dylan C. Lathrop explores the growth of data viz, and the positives and negatives that have emerged during this period. I interviewed Amanda Cox, a graphics editor at the New York Times, to talk about how they create their stunning   and stunningly useful   visualizations. How do they decide what s worth doing? And how do they staff against it? And for fun, we re re running one of our most popular features on  crap circles,  which explores the world of remarkably awful PowerPoint cycle graphics. HBR / Digital Article / Your Business Needs Insight, Not Just Pretty Pictures Copyright   2013 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved. 4 This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. Thank you for joining us, and jump in with your ideas, insights, and visualizations as well. This article was originally published online on March 19, 2013. Scott Berinato is a senior editor at Harvard Business Review and the author of Good Charts Workbook: Tips Tools, and Exercises for Making Better Data Visualizations and Good Charts: The HBR Guide to Making Smarter, More Persuasive Data Visualizations. HBR / Digital Article / Your Business Needs Insight, Not Just Pretty Pictures Copyright   2013 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved. 5 This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org