Digital Article / Business Communication A Checklist for More Persuasive Presentations Ask yourself these questions. by Dorie Clark Published on HBR.org / October 11, 2016 / Reprint H036ZR We all know the basics of good presentation skills: don t read from a script; don t overwhelm your audience with verbose slides; and the like. But for a particular kind of high-stakes presentation   one in which you re trying to get buy-in from key decision-makers   those basics aren t enough. To persuade the people who have the power to approve your idea or let it die, you need to start with a strong outline. Here are the questions to ask yourself so you can structure a presentation, from the outset, Copyright   2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved. 1 This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. that defuses potential objections upfront and is so compelling a  yes  becomes far more likely. What s the problem you re solving? Too often, even experienced professionals start their presentation by talking about the solution they re offering. But if you re presenting to outsiders, or even high-level leaders inside your company, they may not have been following the development process of your project very closely. If you don t explain the context and why it matters upfront, you risk them tuning out early on because they re not sure if your idea is relevant. Why now? The problem may be relevant   but they ve been just fine avoiding it up until this point. Why is this the moment they should change what s been working? Why do they need to take immediate action? Until you prove to them that the problem is urgent, and will continue to get worse unless you address it, their inclination will be to  wait and see  or prioritize other things first. Make sure you ve clearly explained the cost of not taking action. How has the idea been vetted? You may have spent two years working on this project. But the CEO or the board may not fully appreciate the depth of your effort, so it s useful to contextualize it for them. This doesn t mean spending five minutes bragging about your past accomplishments, but you want to highlight evidence of your competence and the seriousness with which you pursued this solution. For instance, it s worth mentioning that your team interviewed 100 leading researchers to identify the best practices you re recommending, or that you ran three pilots to test the concept. As you outline, make sure you build in this critical element upfront. Have you simplified the structure? You re so familiar with your idea, even very complex facets of it now seem obvious to you. But that won t HBR / Digital Article / A Checklist for More Persuasive Presentations Copyright   2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved. 2 This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. be the case for people hearing it the first time. Ask yourself how you can clarify and simplify the information you re presenting, perhaps into a series of numbered steps or phases. For instance, the process of how to reinvent yourself professionally may feel overwhelming. But in my book Reinventing You, I describe a three-phase process of discovering your brand, creating your brand, and living your brand that helps readers break an involved process into discrete steps so they feel comfortable taking action. That enables the audience to grasp a complex solution more readily, and inspires more confidence in the path you re proposing. It also has the added benefit of providing an overarching structure for the meat of your presentation. Have you included a story? Some professions   engineering comes to mind   embrace a  just the facts, ma am  approach, rich with statistics but devoid of stories. It may seem frivolous or pandering if you re not used to presentations that feature illustrative anecdotes, but you re putting yourself at a significant disadvantage if you don t use storytelling as part of your toolkit. That doesn t mean concocting treacly leadership fables. But it does mean recognizing that a piece of data can become more powerful if you pair it with at a concrete example to help others visualize what you re talking about. Make sure your outline includes at least one story to enliven your presentation. Have you included a call to action? The final place most professionals go wrong in their presentations is failing to present a clear call to action at the end. The next step may be obvious to you   invest in our company, or approve the budget for the full-scale launch. But it s rarely that clear to the audience, which is hearing the pitch for the first time. If you ve done your job up to this point, they ll be on your side. Now you can clarify for them exactly what action they can take to show their support. Make sure you ve built this element into your outline. HBR / Digital Article / A Checklist for More Persuasive Presentations Copyright   2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved. 3 This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. Presentations are critical for most professionals, yet too much emphasis is often placed on how your slides look or where you re standing on stage. Of course aesthetics and theatrics matter   but your content is at the heart of whether you win or lose in the moment. If you outline your presentation to ensure you cover these bases, you re far more likely to get the audience on your side quickly and achieve the result you desire. This article was originally published online on October 11, 2016. Dorie Clark is a marketing strategist and professional speaker who teaches at Columbia Business School. She is the author of Entrepreneurial You: Monetize Your Expertise, Create Multiple Income Streams, and Thrive (Harvard Business Review Press, 2017); Stand Out: How to Find Your Breakthrough Idea and Build a Following Around It (Portfolio, 2015); Reinventing You: DefineDefine Your Brand, Imagine Your Future (Harvard Business Review Press, 2013); and The Long Game: How to Be a Long-Term Thinker in a Short-Term World (Harvard Business Review Press, 2021). HBR / Digital Article / A Checklist for More Persuasive Presentations Copyright   2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved. 4 This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org