Digital Article Presentation Skills Nail Your Presentation   Even When Your Time Is Cut Short Three strategies every presenter should keep in their back pocket. by Deborah Grayson Riegel This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. Nail Your Presentation   Even When Your Time Is Cut Short Three strategies every presenter should keep in their back pocket. by Deborah Grayson Riegel Published on HBR.org / July 12, 2023 / Reprint H07PQF Juan Moyano/Stocksy As a professional speaker for three decades, I ve had to deal with my fair share of surprises that could have completely derailed my presentation. Like what? Like speaking during two separate blackouts without lights, AV, or functional toilets. Like facilitating a two-day training session where, in the middle of the first day, all participants got an email letting them HBR / Digital Article / Nail Your Presentation   Even When Your Time Is Cut Short Copyright   2023 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved. 1 This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. know that layoffs were imminent. Like presenting in a glass-enclosed conference room inside the Congo exhibit at the Bronx Zoo, where a gorilla pounded the windows every time I advanced a slide. (I turned off the projector pretty quickly and proceeded anyway.) One of the most common unpleasant surprises that you ve likely faced as a public speaker is getting your time cut short. You go into the meeting with a plan for what you re going to cover based on the allotted time you ve been given. And then, the technology doesn t work until 15 minutes into the meeting. Or the decision-maker shows up late, and you ve waited to start until they arrive. Or someone (and maybe everyone) in the group runs a few minutes over, and by the time it s your turn, those few minutes have compounded and you re left rushing to finish. This can be a lose-lose for both the participants and the presenters. First of all, the participants are likely to experience an uneven distribution of content if the first speakers in a group get to take their time but later speakers have their messages truncated. Second, participants may miss the opportunity to ask questions, clarify understanding, and participate in a discussion if a presentation is shortened or accelerated. Participants are also less likely to understand what the speaker is saying if they re speaking quickly to finish before their time is up. Presenters don t have it much better. They re likely to feel pressured for time and frustrated with the situation (or their team members), which doesn t lend itself to an engaging presentation style. They may miss out on delivering information that s important to the audience in favor of sharing what they really would prefer to talk about. And if they haven t HBR / Digital Article / Nail Your Presentation   Even When Your Time Is Cut Short Copyright   2023 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved. 2 This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. practiced a shorter version of what they re planning to say, they may sound unprepared, nervous, and disjointed. One way to manage this dynamic in advance is to require everyone to practice their section of the presentation with a timer, and cut down their own presentations to meet their allotted time. This can help prevent the inevitable  time creep  in a group setting. A second step in managing this is to make sure that the host or chair doesn t over- program the meeting. They should ensure that the event has enough slack to allow for questions, comments, tangents, and even a glitch or two. Third, whoever is running the meeting should be skilled in managing questions, comments, and tangents against the time allotted for the meeting. And another way to deal with all of this is to make sure that everyone participating has a Plan B that they are willing and able to adapt to ASAP. Here are three Plan B s that every speaker needs in case time gets cut short: 1. Come prepared with two versions of your presentation. Come with the full version of the presentation you planned, and a version that s 50% of what you ve planned. Make sure that you have practiced delivering both (just having a shorter deck won t prepare you to deliver an effective, shorter presentation). As soon as you start to realize that you re not going to have your full allotted time, revert to your shorter version. You might need to make some quick decisions about whether you still need to cut some content. And plan to let your listeners know that you ll provide additional context or content in writing after the meeting. Take the advice of English writer Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch, who coined the phrase  murder your darlings , which means being willing to cut content you care about objectively, and without sentimentality. HBR / Digital Article / Nail Your Presentation   Even When Your Time Is Cut Short Copyright   2023 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved. 3 This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. 2. Just hit the headlines. This means that you have to build your presentation headlines instead of headers. What s the difference between a header and a headline? A header is a neutral catch-all for what you re going to talk about in the slide whereas a headline provides the story of the slide right up top. It lets both the speaker and the audience know the bottom line first. Compare these: Slide header:  2023 Economic Outlook  Slide headline:  2023 Economic Outlook Looks Optimistic  Slide header:  Q2 Sales  Slide headline:  Q2 Sales Bounce Back after Disappointing Q1  Slide header:  Next Steps  Slide headline:  Next Steps: Hiring, Onboarding, and Training  When you have a limited amount of time to present your findings, you can deliver an effective (albeit brief) narrative by just covering the headlines of your deck even if you don t get to explain the details of each slide. 3. Don t apologize, don t throw your colleagues under the bus, and don t sulk. Behave as if this is exactly the version you d always planned to present. (It is highly likely that your audience won t know unless you tell them.) As much as you might be tempted to say something like,  If only our tech team had been prepared this morning  or  Since my colleagues went overtime ,  don t do it. Stay professional and be collaborative. All of those conversations can happen after the meeting   not during. HBR / Digital Article / Nail Your Presentation   Even When Your Time Is Cut Short Copyright   2023 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved. 4 This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. Finally, do some emotional management so that you don t come across to your audience as angry, frustrated, resentful, or resigned. Emotions are contagious, and negative emotions are especially so. Unless you want your audience to feel the tension you feel, take a deep breath or two, and lean into your current reality of how it is rather than how you wished it could be. Being an excellent public speaker requires planning as well as flexibility and resilience. Just because you don t have as much time as you d planned doesn t mean you can t have as much impact as you intended. This article was originally published online on July 12, 2023. Deborah Grayson Riegel is a professional speaker and facilitator, as well as a communication and presentation skills coach. She teaches leadership communication at Duke University s Fuqua School of Business and has taught for Wharton Business School, Columbia Business School s Women in Leadership Program, and Peking University s International MBA Program. She is the author of Overcoming Overthinking: 36 Ways to Tame Anxiety for Work, School, and Life and the best-selling Go To Help: 31 Strategies to Offer,Offer, Ask for, and Accept Help. HBR / Digital Article / Nail Your Presentation   Even When Your Time Is Cut Short Copyright   2023 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved. 5 This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org