REPRINT H00ADT PUBLISHED ON HBR.ORG MARCH 28, 2013 ARTICLE PRESENTATIONS When Presenting Your Data, Get to the Point Fast by Nancy Duarte This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. PRESENTATIONS When Presenting Your Data, Get to the Point Fast by Nancy Duarte MARCH 28, 2013 Projecting your data on slides puts you at an immediate disadvantage: When you re giving a presentation, people can t pull the numbers in for a closer look or take as much time to examine them as they can with a report or a white paper. That s why you need to direct their attention. What do you want people to get from your data? What s the message you want them to take away? Data slides aren t really about the data. They re about the meaning of the data. And it s up to you to make that meaning clear before you click away. Otherwise, the audience won t process   let alone buy   your argument. Take this table, for instance: 2 COPYRIGHT   2013 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. It s confusing   especially if you project it for five seconds and then move on. And even if you leave it up for five minutes while you talk, anyone who s struggling to derive meaning from it won t be paying much attention to what you have to say. They ll be too busy squinting from their seats, trying to navigate all those heavy grid lines that give every single cell equal weight. It s not at all clear where the eye should go. Your audience won t know what direction to read   horizontally or vertically   or what conclusions to draw. Though the Grand Total line is emphasized, is that really the main point you want to convey? Now let s look at the data presented more simply. Say you ve identified three business units with potential for sustained growth in Europe. By eliminating the dense matrix and connecting only key numbers to a pie with leader lines, you remove clutter that distracts from your message. And notice the clear hierarchy of information: You can highlight important pieces of the pie by rendering them in color and their corresponding annotations in large, blue type. Other sections recede to the background, where they belong, with their neutral shades and small, gray labels. 3 COPYRIGHT   2013 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. But pie charts can be tricky for an audience to process when segments are similar in size   it s hard to distinguish between them at a glance. If you re running into that problem, consider displaying the same data in a linear way. In this bar chart, for example, you draw attention to the poorest- performing unit, a point that got lost in the pie: 4 COPYRIGHT   2013 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu ( lms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies. These few tricks will help audiences see what you want them to see in your data. By focusing their attention on the message behind the numbers, not on the numbers themselves, you can create presentations that resonate with them and compel them to act. Nancy Duarte is a best-selling author with thirty years of CEO-ing under her belt. She s driven her firm, Duarte, Inc., to be the global leader behind some of the most influential messages and visuals in business and culture. Duarte, Inc., is the largest design firm in Silicon Valley, as well as one of the top woman-owned businesses in the area. Nancy has written six best-selling books, four have won awards, and her new book, DataStory: Explain Data and Inspire Action Through Story, is available now. Follow Duarte on Twitter: @nancyduarte or LinkedIn. 5 COPYRIGHT   2013 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org