10
The Ten Principles 
of Facilitation: 
A Facilitator’s 
Methodology

2
3
www.leadstrat.com  | 800-824-2850
www.leadstrat.com  | 800-824-2850
A facilitated session is a highly-structured meeting in which the meeting leader (the facilitator) guides 
the participants through a series of pre-defined steps to arrive at a result that is created, understood and 
accepted by all participants.
In Michael Wilkinson’s authoritative book on facilitation, The Secrets of Facilitation, he shares more than 
50 secrets to effective facilitating.  Here we want to share one of the most essential secrets – in fact, the 
fundamental secret:
You can achieve more effective results when solutions are created, understood and accepted by the 
people impacted. If they create it, they understand it and they accept it.
In his book Transforming the Mature Information Technology Organization, Dr. Robert Zawacki from the 
University of Colorado put the secret this way:
ED = RD x CD
That is, Effective Decisions = The Right Decision times Commitment to the Decision.  Dr. Zawacki’s point is 
that the multiplication sign in the formula means that even the best decision can be rendered completely 
ineffective if commitment to the decision is lacking.  A group of consultants might have created the 100% 
solution for the Sanitation Bureau, but if the workers did not buy-in to the solution, the effectiveness of the 
solution would have been near zero. 
The Ten Principles of Facilitation: A Facilitator’s Methodology
Many know the secret.  Yet few truly understand how to apply it and how to unleash the power that comes 
with getting people together to develop solutions that will work for them.  For example, few understand –
• 
How to get people excited about participating in a solution process
• 
How to keep them focused and engaged
• 
How to ask questions that challenge without alienating
• 
How to guide a group without overpowering them
• 
How to address disagreements and build consensus
• 
How to deal with people who drop out, dominate, or demonstrate other dysfunctional behaviors 
that can be disruptive
• 
How to ensure you gain commitment to action 
That’s why we created The Facilitator’s Methodology: The Ten Principles of Facilitation. Following these 
ten principles allows professional facilitators to hit their mark every time and subject matter experts who 
lead sessions and meetings to easily follow a proven and repeatable methodology for leading groups to 
consensus.

4
5
www.leadstrat.com  | 800-824-2850
www.leadstrat.com  | 800-824-2850
1.
 
Preparing 
 
for Success 
 
2.
 
Getting 
 
the Session 
Started 
 
9.
 
Closing the 
Session 
 
3.
 
Focusing 
the Group 
 
4.
 
The Power 
of the Pen 
 
5.
 
Information 
Gathering 
 
7.
 
Consensus 
Building 
 
8.
 
Keeping the 
Energy High 
 
6.
 
Managing 
Dysfunction 
 
Group 
Dynamics 
The Facilitation Cycle
 
10. 
Agenda 
Setting 
 
Many consider facilitation to be an art, but there is definitely a science to the art.  The 
Facilitator’s Methodology is at the foundation, and it is what the ten principles and LSI’s 
facilitation training courses are based on.  

6
7
www.leadstrat.com  | 800-824-2850
www.leadstrat.com  | 800-824-2850
1. Preparing for Success - Cover 
all the bases
You have been asked to lead a meeting with the 
executives of the organization to address three critical 
barriers to growth.  It is essential to the organization’s 
future (and your career development) that this session 
be highly successful.  
2. Getting the Session Started - 
Inform, excite, empower, involve
During our interviews with the veteran facilitators, we 
learned that the opening of any facilitated session is 
so critical; we dedicated an entire principle to the first 
fifteen minutes.  During this time you set the stage 
for everything that follows.  Start poorly, and you are 
fighting an uphill battle.  
3. Focusing the Group - Establish 
the course; avoid detours
Principles 3, 4 and 5 make up what we call the 
facilitation cycle.  For every agenda item in a facilitated 
session, you must focus the group (Principle 3), use the 
power of the pen (Principle 4) and perform information 
gathering (Principle 5).  When you are done with the 
first agenda item, you go back to focusing the group 
(Principle 3) and go through the cycle for the second 
agenda item, and so on, until all agenda items are 
covered.
4. The Power of the Pen - Use it, 
don’t abuse it, make it theirs
Most facilitators aren’t aware that they can drive a 
group dysfunctional simply by abusing the pen.  Often 
facilitators unintentionally devalue a participant’s 
comments by NOT recording a remark with which 
they disagree or waiting until the remark is validated 
by other people.  Other times, they reword the 
participant’s comment, then record the reworded 
version (tacitly implying that the original words 
were not good enough!)  In time, the group can lose 
complete ownership over the recorded comments 
simply because the comments aren’t theirs, but instead 
the facilitator’s.
5. Information Gathering - Know 
your tools and how to use them
Facilitators must have a wealth of tools at their 
disposal in order to address a variety of needs.  The 
most important tool for a facilitator is questioning.  
Rather than knowing just open- and closed-ended 
questioning techniques, a Smart facilitator has nine 
different questioning tools.
6. Managing Dysfunction - 
Conscious Prevention, Early 
Detection, Clean Resolution
How do you deal with someone who is constantly 
saying, “No, that won’t work…The one you’re talking 
about now, we tried before, and it’s a bad idea…
No, not practical, not realistic, won’t work here?”  
What about the people who want to dominate the 
discussion?  Or - just the opposite - the people who sit 
there and say nothing, until they go out the door and 
then say how much a waste of time the meeting was?  
Most facilitators fear dysfunctional behavior and seek 
a wealth of techniques to address it should it occur.  
Smart Facilitators know that the key to dysfunction is 
to address it before it occurs (conscious prevention), 
detect it early if it does happen (early detection) and 
cleanly resolve it so that it goes away for good (clean 
resolution).
7. Consensus Building - Create 
and maintain a consensus-
focused process
Smart Facilitators know that people disagree for only 
three reasons.  As facilitators, it is our job to create 
an environment in which consensus is the goal and 
identifying and resolving sources of disagreement 
is seen as a vehicle for achieving the goal.  When 
disagreements occur, we must recognize why people 
are disagreeing and be able to apply the appropriate 
consensus building strategy based on the source of the 
disagreement.
8. Keeping the Energy High - Set 
the pace, anticipate the lulls, 
react accordingly
Whether you are leading a single two-hour meeting or 
a series of half-day meetings, high energy is essential to 
keeping the group’s interest and engagement.
9. Closing The Session - Review, 
evaluate, end, debrief
Often meetings end without a clear understanding of 
what was accomplished, what decisions were made, 
etc.  Smart Facilitators know that in closing a session it 
is important that everyone is clear on what was done, 
the benefits of what was done, the actions to take place 
once the meeting is over, and the method for ensuring 
that the actions were accomplished.
10. Agenda Setting - Adapt your 
agenda to address the need
The tenth principle ends at the beginning with 
constructing agendas that incorporate the other nine 
principles.
Now that you’ve been introduced to all ten of the 
principles, let’s take it one step further and uncover 
some key concepts about each principle.
Developing the 
Ten Principles
Supporting the ten principles are specific techniques 
that demonstrate how to execute the principles 
in practice.  Some are covered here in this eBook, 
and the rest are taught in our training courses. 
Together, the principles and techniques comprise 
a comprehensive facilitation methodology that 
produces consistent, repeatable results.    
Facilitation works. You will achieve more effective 
results when solutions are created, understood and 
accepted by the people impacted.  You will be more 
successful, have more effective meetings, and gain 
better results in management situations.  There is 
still much for us all to learn about the science of 
facilitation.  Hopefully, this book will help you learn 
the secrets that Smart Facilitators already know for 
achieving consistent, repeatable results through 
facilitation.

8
9
www.leadstrat.com  | 800-824-2850
www.leadstrat.com  | 800-824-2850
Principle 1
Preparing for Success - Cover all 
the bases 
What does it take to be prepared for a facilitated 
session?  Expert facilitators know that whether they 
are preparing for running a task force meeting, 
delivering a presentation or meeting with a 
customer, the secret to preparation is the same: they 
must achieve a clear understanding of the “5 Ps.”
The 5 Ps of Preparation
• 
The “Purpose” explains the overall aim. 
Why are we holding this session?
	
Whether you are designing a conference, 
giving a speech or planning a vacation, it is 
important to have a clearly stated purpose 
that is shared by all involved.  When 
purpose is unclear or not shared, it is easy 
for an activity to go astray. 
• 
The “Product” defines the items that must 
be produced to achieve the purpose. What 
do we want to have when we are done?  
	
Identifying the desired product allows 
you to transform what might be a highly 
nebulous purpose statement into a 
set of distinct deliverables that define 
achievement of the purpose.
Principle 2
Getting the Session Started - 
Inform, excite, empower, involve
Opening the Session
How you start a facilitated session is critical to the 
overall success of the session. Conventional wisdom 
states that a good meeting should start with the 
agenda.  The reason typically given is that the 
agenda answers the question, “What are we going 
to do?”  However, the reality is that participants in a 
facilitated session need answers to several questions 
before the agenda is discussed:
• 
Why are we having this session?
• 
What do we need to have accomplished 
when we are done?
• 
What is our role in the decision-making?
• 
Why should I invest the time?
The opening sets the tone, pace and expectation for 
the rest of the day.  Your opening words should cover 
four key points: inform, excite, empower and involve 
(IEEI).  You may consider using the IEEI as an outline 
for your opening.  
IEEI
• 
Inform the participants about the overall 
purpose of the meeting through the 
session objective.
	
This involves participants immediately 
and lets them know that their needs 
and desires are being considered.  It also 
provides an opportunity to adjust the 
agenda if flexibility is possible
• 
The “Participants” identifies the people 
who need to be involved. Who are the 
participants and what are their perspectives?  
	
These three key questions can help an 
organization determine the right people to 
have engaged in a group process:
• 
Who are the people who will be 
impacted by the decision?
• 
What level of involvement should 
they have in the process?
• 
Whose perspectives, involvement, 
and buy-in are so critical that 
they should be at the table or 
represented by someone who is?
• 
The “Probable Issues” defines the 
concerns that will likely arise. What are 
the probable issues that will need to be 
addressed?  
	
Most organizations have their share of 
potentially challenging issues that can 
come up during a facilitated session.  To 
be fully prepared, you must work to define 
any probable issues that could have an 
impact on the success of the session.  
Meeting with the sponsor and a selected 
participants in a management briefing 
before the session can help you do this.
• 
The “Process” details the steps that will be 
taken to create the product, taking into 
account the Participants and Probable 
Issues. How will we go about achieving 
the purpose, given the product desired, the 
participants and the probable issues we will 
face?
	
A process is simply a series of steps to 
arrive at a result. If purpose is the steering 
wheel of a car, process is the engine. 
Whereas purpose sets the direction, 
process gets you to your destination.  Your 
agenda is the tool you will use to manage 
your process.
• 
Excite them about the process by giving 
them a clear vision of the overall result to 
be achieved and the benefits to them.
	
A common facilitation mistake is spending 
critical beginning time on ground rules, 
introductions and letting people know 
the location of the bathrooms.  While 
important, these are not the vital points 
that engage participants and get them 
committed to achieving the session 
purpose. Excite them with two to four 
sentences benefits they will realize by 
achieving results.
• 
Empower them by discussing the 
important role they play in the process, 
the reason they were selected or the 
authority that has been given to them.
• 
Involve them as early as possible by 
identifying their personal objectives, the 
issues that must be covered, the challenges 
that must be overcome or some other 
topic that contributes to the overall goal of 
the session.
Tip: For maximum impact memorize your opening 
statement so you can focus on establishing rapport 
with the group through eye contact, movement, 
gestures and other presentation techniques.

10
11
www.leadstrat.com  | 800-824-2850
www.leadstrat.com  | 800-824-2850
Principle 3
Focusing the Group: Establish 
the course, avoid detours
Now that you have the group informed, excited, 
empowered and involved, how do you get 
them focused and keep them focused?  How do 
you prevent the group from going off on long, 
unproductive detours?  There are multiple tools you 
can use.  Here is one of our favorites:
Using Checkpoints
At the beginning of every agenda item and 
facilitated process, it is important to take a 
checkpoint by doing the following:
• 
Review – Review quickly what has been 
done to date.
• 
Preview – Describe briefly what the group 
is about to do.
• 
Big View – Explain how the previewed 
agenda item fits into the overall objective 
of the session.
Why is a checkpoint necessary?  The checkpoint 
serves to ensure that all participants are aware 
that a transition is taking place, and helps them 
understand how the process they are about to 
undertake relates to has been done and the overall 
session purpose.
Facilitators tend to be fairly good at the review and 
preview parts of a checkpoint.  Unfortunately, we 
tend to leave out the key component, the big view.  
The big view explains why the step is important and 
why the participants should invest their time in the 
step.  The big view should always tie back to the 
overall session objective by explaining how this step 
contributes to the session purpose.  
Tip: If a single agenda item has more than one 
facilitated process, you should use more than one 
checkpoint.
Principle 4
The Power of the Pen: Use it 
don’t abuse it, make it theirs
The documentation from a facilitated session is 
the official record of the results of the meeting.  
The facilitator has a big responsibility to ensure 
that participants agree with the documentation 
of the session before the session ends.  Be sure 
to get agreement from the participants that 
the information you record during the session 
is accurate as you go along.  Participants tend 
to pay closer attention to ensuring that all key 
information is recorded.  After the session, have 
the notes transcribed, edited and distributed to all 
participants.
What should be documented in a session?
1.	 Decisions made during the session
2.	 Actions assigned during the session
3.	 Outstanding issues as a result of the session
4.	 Relevant analysis and comments made 
during the session.
The Power of the Pen
Few facilitators truly understand the power of the 
pen.  When facilitators don’t record what participants 
say or when facilitators record their own words and 
not the words of the participants, we are abusing the 
power of the pen.  As evidenced by the public safety 
case study that started this section, a facilitator can 
drive participants dysfunctional simply by abusing 
the pen.  Abuse of the pen can very easily lead to 
participants dropping out, participants arguing 
with the facilitator, participants not buying into the 
overall result.
Tip: It can be helpful to have someone else do the 
writing while you facilitate.  Using a scribe Using a 
scribe reduces the load on the facilitator and has 
the added advantage of allowing the facilitator to 
maintain greater eye contact and greater physical 
proximity to the group.
Principle 5
Information Gathering: Know 
your tools and how to use them
A higher level facilitated process, such as strategic 
planning or process improvement, uses a series of 
building block processes to achieve its goals.  In 
some cases, the participants provide information 
they already know.  In other cases, they generate 
ideas.  In still other cases, they categorize 
information or make decisions.  We recommend 
numerous engagement strategies that support 
many of these information gathering activities, and 
over 20 of them are available here. 
While there are many types of information gathering 
and processing activities that serve as building 
blocks, for our purposes we break them into seven 
major functions. See table to right.
Gathering Facts
Generating Ideas
Getting Feedback
Categorizing
Inquiring
Reporting
Prioritizing
BUILDING
BLOCK
PROCESSES
HIGHER LEVEL
PROCESSES
Reengineering
Strategic
Planning
Program
Planning
Workﬂow
Requirements
Analysis
Procedure
Design
Team
Building
Issue
Resolution
Process
Improvement
1. Gathering
     Facts
How does the 
process work 
today?
To gain greater 
detailed 
information; most 
appropriate when 
there are “right” 
answers
2. Categorizing
What are the key 
groupings 
represented by 
this information?
To group 
information into 
categories for 
further 
processing
3. Inquiring
What questions 
do we want to 
see answered?
To have 
participants create 
questions or ask 
questions of a 
speaker, a panel or 
each other
4. Generating
     Ideas
What are 
possible ways 
this problem 
could be 
solved?
To create possible 
solutions or 
approaches; most 
appropriate when 
there are multiple 
possibilities and 
creativity is 
desired
6. Reporting
What did your 
group come 
up with?
To inform about 
results of a 
breakout exercise 
or other activity.
5. Prioritizing
Which of 
these 
solutions is 
best?
To rank, rate or 
select.
7. Getting
     Feedback
What were the 
strengths and 
weaknesses of 
today’s session?
To evaluate the 
session or other 
experience.
Function
Sample
Question
Purpose

12
13
www.leadstrat.com  | 800-824-2850
www.leadstrat.com  | 800-824-2850
Principle 6
Closing the Session: Review, 
evaluate, end, debrief
All too often meetings end with many dangling 
loose ends.  As a result of the loose ends, within a 
day or two, there can be differences of opinion as to 
what actually happened in the meeting.  Sometimes 
the differences are so great, you are left wondering if 
everyone attended the same meeting!
You can achieve these outcomes by using a four-
step closing sequence: review, evaluate, close and 
debrief.  As you will see, the closing process can 
require as little as 10 minutes for a brief meeting and 
as long as 45 minutes for an all-day meeting.
• 
Review the activities performed, the 
participants’ objectives and the parking 
boards (issues, decisions and actions)
	
Prior to closing the session, the facilitator 
starts by reviewing the activities 
completed during the meeting.  The review 
provides the team with a focused reminder 
of all that that was covered in the meeting. 
After reviewing the activities completed, 
the next step is to review the participants’ 
personal objectives documented early in 
the session.
• 
Evaluate the value of the session and the 
results achieved
	
Feedback is a critical part of the continuous 
improvement cycle.  Strive to gain 
documented feedback from every session 
you facilitate.  Be sure to encourage 
specific comments, whether positive or 
negative.  Specificity tells you what you 
should continue to do and what you 
should consider changing. 
Principle 7
Managing Dysfunction: 
Conscious prevention, early 
detection, clean resolution
Dysfunction behavior is any activity by a participant 
that is consciously or unconsciously a substitution 
for expressing displeasure with the session content 
or purpose, the facilitation process, or outside 
factors.  
Dysfunctional behavior is a symptom, 
not a root cause.
This definition has three important implications.
• 
Behavior is dysfunctional not people.  
A person in one meeting may be actively 
and cooperatively participating; but in 
the next meeting the behavior may turn 
dysfunctional.  In fact, the transition from 
functional to dysfunctional can occur in 
the same meeting, multiple times!
• 
The dysfunctional behavior may be 
conscious or unconscious.  Often times, 
people exhibiting signs of dysfunction are 
not aware of the behavior.  Other times, the 
behavior is intentional in an effort to bring 
about change, disruption or some other 
action.
• 
The dysfunction is a substitution for 
expressing displeasure related to the 
session content, process or outside factor. 
For example, the content issue might be 
that a comment was made with which 
the participant strongly disagrees.  If the 
displeasure is with the process, it might 
be that the participant feels that the pace 
is too fast or that the process is getting in 
the way of getting to the real work.  If the 
displeasure is an outside factor, it might 
be that there is an issue in the participant’s 
personal life that has him distracted and 
unable to focus on the session.
• 
End  by reminding of the next steps and 
formally ending the session
	
After all of the open issues, decisions, and 
action items have been reviewed and the 
session has been evaluated, you are ready 
to formally end the session.
• 
Thank the participants for their 
involvement.  Remind them of the 
part this meeting will play in the 
overall objective.
• 
Remind the team of the next steps, 
including the following:
• 
Who will document the 
session?
• 
When and how the results 
will be distributed?
• 
The place, date, time and 
purpose of the next session
• 
Formally end the session
• 
Debrief with the meeting sponsor 
to identify strengths and areas for 
improvement
	
As soon as possible after the session, meet 
with the sponsor to discuss the session 
process and the results.  
Tip: Be sure to plan adequate time for the closing
As you might imagine, this is a very popular topic 
in our courses, so there is a lot more information 
we teach on dysfunction! Learn more about how to 
manage dysfunction, including identifying it early 
through our course, The Effective Facilitator.
praiser
Active
Listener
peacemaker
Guide
motivator
BridgeBuilder
A+B=C
A
B
Taskmaster
clairvoyant
BONUS: Learn about each of the 
8 Roles of a Facilitator here.

14
15
www.leadstrat.com  | 800-824-2850
www.leadstrat.com  | 800-824-2850
Principle 8
Building Consensus: Create and 
maintain a consensus-focused 
process
“Consensus” is a widely misunderstood concept. 
Many people believe that for them to be in 
consensus with a decision, they have to believe that 
the decision is the best decision.  With this definition, 
therefore, they believe debate must continue until 
they convince the others or the others convince 
them.
The implications of this definition of consensus on 
organization productivity can be staggering.  Allow 
me to explain by way of an analogy.  In the US, a 
jury is made up of 12 people.  They must all agree 
whether the defendant is guilty or not guilty.  Often 
this can take multiple days.  Sometimes it takes so 
long that they quit and declare a mistrial.  In a work 
environment, the time it would take for that kind of 
consensus to be achieved on all decisions would be 
next to impossible.
To avoid the major investment of time and energy 
that 100 percent agreement on every aspect of 
a solution would require, we believe a different 
definition of consensus is more appropriate.
Consensus means: “I can live with it and I will 
support it.”
Consensus does not mean, “I think this is the best 
solution.”  Consensus simply means, “I can live with it 
and I will support it through implementation.”
It’s important to have an arsenal of tools to use to 
gain consensus, like: 
1.	 Delineation
2.	 Strengths and weaknesses
3.	 Merge
4.	 Weighted scoring
Principle 9
Keeping the Energy High: Set the 
pace, anticipate the lulls, react 
accordingly
To really understand “energy” is to understand that it 
does three important things: it energizes the topic, 
engages the participants, and elevates the facilitator.
How does High Energy Energize a Topic?
When a facilitator leads a session with energy, the 
energy transfers to the topic.  By being passionate 
about the topic, you are implicitly saying to the 
participants, “This is important to me, and it should 
be important to you.”  Your actions and your energy 
around the topic help energize the topic for the 
participants.  And, just as high energy can make 
a topic more interesting, likewise, low energy can 
make a topic less interesting.  
How does High Energy Engage the Participants?
For most people, high energy is just more appealing 
to listen to then low energy.  In essence, high energy 
is just more fun.  Of course there is a point where 
high energy goes “over the top,” and becomes less 
interesting and more irritating.  But short of being 
overdone, high energy invites participants to listen 
and stay alert.  Unfortunately, low energy can invite 
participants to check out or fall asleep.  
How does High Energy Elevate the Facilitator?
Energy can have a significant impact on the 
participants’ perception of the facilitator.  High 
energy projects confidence and low energy projects 
just the opposite.  
Tip: Early in the session, and possibly as a ground 
rule, establish a simple recharge activity.  The 
point of a recharge is to provide a simple tool for 
empowering participants to raise the energy level 
whenever needed.  We call it the “Choo Choo” in 
our training sessions, and our participants love it. 
Whether it be the “Choo Choo” or something else 
your group calls it, get creative and have fun with it! 
The point is to energize. 
Principle 10
Agenda Setting: Adapt your 
agenda to address the need
Process Produces Results
If “purpose” is the steering wheel of a car, “process” 
is the engine.  While purpose sets the direction, 
process gets you to your destination.  A process 
is simply a series of steps to arrive at a result.  To 
accomplish anything, people step through a process.  
Whether developing a strategic plan for a multi-
billion dollar corporation or ordering a hamburger 
from the take-out window (“Will you have fries with 
that?”), a series of steps are used to arrive at the 
result.
Part of the job of a facilitator is to create the process 
(the agenda) the team will use to accomplish its 
purpose.  If the facilitator is successful, the team 
will be able to execute the process effectively and 
efficiently.  They will produce the desired result, 
wasting no resources and with minimal strain.
Know Your Process Cold: The Facilitation Guide
While a standard agenda might include the specific 
activities to be covered, a detailed facilitation guide 
covers considerably more.  The purpose of the 
facilitation guide is to ensure that the facilitator has 
thought through how each agenda item will be 
facilitated.  
A detailed facilitation guide includes the following:
• 
Purpose of the session
• 
Products to be created (and sample 
formats if possible)
• 
Process steps to be taken (this is what most 
people think of as the agenda)
• 
Facilitation details for each process step 
(P-Q-R-S-T)
• 
Process technique that will be 
used (e.g., brain-storming, listing, 
prioritizing, grouping – see The 
Secrets of Information Gathering); 
• 
Question to start the process step 
(i.e., the type-b starting question); 
• 
Recording method to document 
the responses received (e.g., simple 
list, two-column matrix, participants 
record on post-ittm pads);
• 
Supplies required to perform the 
process (e.g., post-ittm, dots)
• 
Timing and estimated duration
Consider having a facilitation guide for each of 
your standard agendas.  The benefits of having a 
facilitation guide are similar to the benefits of a 
sample agenda, only amplified.

16
17
www.leadstrat.com  | 800-824-2850
Applying this methodology will help you lead a group to consensus every time and bring the 
facilitative leader out of you. Find more helpful facilitation training here to take your skills to 
the next level.
Now that we have 
introduced you to the Ten 
Principles of Facilitation, 
try them! 
Help us share the power of facilitation
Leadership Strategies, Inc. is a national leader in facilitation 
services, having trained over 17,000 individuals in facilitation skills 
for twenty years. We provide professional facilitation services for 
areas such as strategic planning, issue resolution, team building, and 
that help individuals strengthen their soft skills through facilitation.
TAKE A FACILITATIVE APPROACH
leadstrat.com
800.824.2850
connect with us.
5 OUT OF 21 CMFS 
ARE A PART OF LSI
5 OUT OF 21 CMFS 
ARE A PART OF LSI
