
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Copyright © 2016 by Michael W. Allen. All rights reserved
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey
Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or
otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright
Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through
payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood
Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the web at
www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the
Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030,
(201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their
best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with the respect
to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any
implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be
created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and
strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a
professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for
damages arising herefrom.
For general information about our other products and services, please contact our Customer
Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at
(317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some
material included with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or
in print-on-demand. If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in
the version you purchased, you may download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com.
For more information about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available:
ISBN 9781119046325 (Paperback)
ISBN 9781119046394 (ePDF)
ISBN 9781119046332 (ePub)
Cover Design: Wiley
Cover Image: Courtesy of Michael Allen
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Contents
Foreword by Tony Bingham
xiii
Preface
xv
Acknowledgments
xix
Chapter 1
What’s New?
1
PART 1
THE BUSINESS PERSPECTIVE
15
Chapter 2
Plain Talk
17
Chapter 3
What You Don’t Know Can Kill (Your
e-Learning)
29
Chapter 4
Making Success Possible
41
Chapter 5
Executive’s Guide to Good e-Learning
75
Chapter 6
Where Does e-Learning Fit?
85
PART 2
GREAT E-LEARNING DESIGN
97
Chapter 7
Seven Simple Success Strategies
99
Chapter 8
The Serious e-Learning Manifesto
111
Chapter 9
Motivation in Learning
123
Chapter 10
Seven Magic Keys to Motivational e-Learning
133
Magic Key 1: Build on Anticipated Outcomes
135
Magic Key 2: Put the Learner at Risk
146
Magic Key 3: Select the Right Content for
Each Learner
158
Magic Key 4: Use an Appealing Context
173

Magic Key 5: Have the Learner Perform
Multistep Tasks
194
Magic Key 6: Provide Intrinsic Feedback
200
Magic Key 7: Delay Judgment
203
Chapter 11
Navigation
213
Chapter 12
CCAF and Interactive Instruction
237
Chapter 13
Interactivity Paradigms That Work
269
Chapter 14
Successive Approximation and SAM
299
PART 3
SERIOUS LEARNING GAMES
329
Chapter 15
Serious Learning Games: Where Rules Rule
331
Chapter 16
Integrating Instructional Content and Games
343
Chapter 17
Learning Games, Serious or Not?
359
About the Author
379
References
381
Additional Resources
387
Index
389
xii
Contents

Preface
It seems like yesterday when the first edition of Michael Allen’s Guide to
e-Learning was published. But it was actually almost 13 years ago when the
first copy was delivered to my doorstep on Christmas Day, even finding
me vacationing with my family on Grand Cayman Island. Talk about your
publisher pulling out all the stops to deliver a present at the best time
and place!
When writing the first edition, I thought about how much I learned
from very early endeavors in e-learning. Each undertaking was a serious
event because expensive equipment was involved, programming took a
lot of time and effort, and there were many skeptics ready to point out
shortcomings. Disrupting sacred traditions of teaching, introducing cold
insensitive machinery, and suggesting that teachers might better use their
time as a resource to students rather than as presenters were bold and
radical disruptions.
There actually are inspiring achievements from early work, along with
many demonstrations of ineffective directions, of course. The future
promised meaningful, memorable, and motivational learning opportu-
nities for all—if and when the barrier of delivery costs were overcome.
Not only have delivery costs dropped to negligible levels (something
we honestly couldn’t have contemplated), but the capabilities of the
delivery systems are now also greatly expanded to include video, anima-
tion, instantaneous searches of live data, portability, and so much more.
We now have none of the barriers we previously faced to provide excellent
learning opportunities to all citizens of planet Earth—and at a very low
cost, if any.
What happened?
Well, the situation flip-flopped. In centers where instructional tech-
nology was being developed and tested, we developed critical know-how
regarding how to use technology effectively. Today, we have legions of
people who are confident that their abilities to use tools to present content

and ask questions is sufficient. Instead of repeated evaluations to make
certain instructional software is effective before going live on expensive
delivery systems, e-learning courseware is now routinely delivered with
no evaluation ever. Today, we’re concerned about every minute of author-
ing time, as opposed to the volumes of hours learners spend, productively
or not.
So, the mission of this book has not changed. I continue to look for
simplifying methods of courseware design that can both reduce authoring
time and, most important, increase learning impact. I believe much of
what I offered in the first edition remains valid, but I’ve gathered and share
herein additional concepts and methods that are useful to my colleagues
and me.
Examples are always valuable, so I’ve updated examples, retaining a few
that seem to make some points as clear as can be and adding new ones
for inspiration. Because the nature of interactive instructional designs
can best be understood by describing the essential components of con-
text, challenge, activity, and feedback (CCAF), many of the examples are
presented through identification of these components.
Second Edition Examples
Chapter Page Concept
Example Title
3
36
Experiences vs. presentations
Locating an Earthquake’s
Epicenter
10
139
Building motivation through
anticipated outcomes vs.
learning objectives
Expedia Travel Planning
10
151
Using risk to increase learning
motivation
Sunnyside Grill
10
163
Reversing traditional “tell and
test” to measuring abilities first
(testing) allows subsequent
instruction to be tailored to
individual needs
Cooking with Flair: Preparing
Fruits, Salads, and
Vegetables
10
180
A compelling story and novel
are combine to make an
engaging context
Manhattan Associates:
Supply Chain Training
10
181
Using a novel context to make
learning experiences memorable
Why Does Glue Stick?
xvi
Preface

Chapter Page Concept
Example Title
10
190
Authentic multistep tasks
engage learners more deeply
and help transfer learning to
performance
POST LERT First Responder
10
202
Delayed judgment is more
representative of the
performance feedback learners
receive on the job
AutoNation: Customer Care
11
214
Allowing learners to browse and
assess courseware as easily as
they would a book
ZebraZapps “Sneak Peek”
feature
12
237
Primary components of
instructional interactivity (CCAF)
Supervisor Effectiveness:
Employee Security
12
243
Second example of CCAF
Railroad Safety for
Professional Drivers
12
259
Varying complexity of user
gestures doesn’t equate to
more effective learning
experiences
Deciduous and Coniferous
Trees
13
266
Models That Work: Increased
incentive to learn when
available help takes more effort
to access
Airline Reservations and
Ticketing
13
269
Models That Work: Task Model
NYU Medical: Integrated
Clinical Information System
13
275
Models That Work: Corrective
Feedback Paradigm (CFP)
Who Wants to Be a Miller?
13
281
Models That Work:
Problem-Solving Investigation
Corning Substance Abuse
13
285
Models That Work: Discovery
learning
POST-LERT—Recognizing
and Reporting
13
290
Models That Work: Storytelling
In Their Virtual Shoes
(Washington State Coalition
Against Domestic Violence)
16
247
Integrating games and learning
content
Sunnyside Grill
17
359
Using extrinsic games for drills
and practice
Modified Jeopardy Board
Preface
xvii

I hope you’ll agree that this edition digs to the roots of excellent learn-
ing experiences, identifies and clarifies the critical components, shows how
to match instructional strategies to identified types of targeted outcomes,
and simplifies instructional design in valid, practical ways.
I’m so grateful for the great flood of feedback from the first edition. It
has inspired me in countless ways, and I’ve learned so much from readers
and their feedback. Please, do let me hear from you!
Michael Allen
February 2016
xviii
Preface

Chapter 1
What’s New?
What’s new in our field? What’s new in this second edition
of the Guide?
Useful world knowledge continues to advance by leaps and bounds.
Along with the growth of knowledge comes the need for more effective
access, communication, and aids to learning these ever-more-complex
understandings.
Similarly, brain research continues to inform conversations across
multiple disciplines (Blakemore and Frith, 2005) and appears on the edge
of providing valuable insights for teaching, although we remain short
of transferring knowledge instantly and bioelectrically as forecast in the
movie The Matrix:
“Can you fly that thing [helicopter]?”
“Not yet.” Taps cell phone.
“Operator.”
“I need a pilot program for a B212 helicopter. Hurry.” Seconds later:
Enlightened facial expression. “Let’s go!”
As technology transforms in amazing ways, often with unexpected
consequences, I’m ready to think we will find effortless ways to transfer
knowledge and skills at some point. But as appealing as that is, we need
to accept the fact we’re just not there yet. In the meantime, the question
should be: while it’s still necessary for learners to do their own learning,
how can we best facilitate the process?

My observation is that we continue to look for unrealistically easy
answers. We even hope access to information may preclude the need for
any instruction or learning at all. It seems we want to avoid the work of
creating meaningful, memorable, motivational learning experiences, even
though there’s no doubt they provide the best way for people to learn and
improve performance. There’s no evidence the fundamentals of human
brain function have changed recently and diminished the value of effective
instruction, But, we seem to keep looking for signs that has occurred as
an excuse for not doing the admittedly challenging work of instructional
design.
Although there are frequent claims that succeeding generations learn
in different ways, most are myths (Bruyckere, Kirschner, and Hulshof,
2015). I’ve seen no foundational changes in what we know about how
people learn or in what we know about effective instruction. The critical
principles remain valid and, sadly, unheeded. And yet claims abound that,
with advances in technology, everything has changed.
This edition of Michael Allen’s Guide to e-Learning was created to
respond to the assertions that everything has changed and quality instruc-
tional design is not longer critical. Responses are provided through:
• New perspectives on the hyperbolical claims that everything has
changed
• Additional efforts to simplify and clarify foundational principles that
haven’t changed (and aren’t likely ever to change)
• A fresh, new, and expanded collection of examples of approaches
that work
To get started, let’s take a look at these opposing perspectives—that
nothing fundamental has changed versus everything (or at least a whole
lot) has changed.
2
Chapter 1

Nothing Has Changed!
Let’s first consider the perspective that nothing has changed—at least not
the most important aspects of learning and instruction. Take the process
of human learning, for instance. The foundations of human learning have
not changed, despite concerning attempts to excuse lack of instructional
effectiveness by suggesting the human brain works differently now that
we’re in the digital age (Bruyckere et al., 2015, p. 142).
We’re still quite certain that much of human learning is centralized
in the brain and that information gets to the brain through our nervous
system from our senses of sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch, and through
kinesthesia (awareness of the position and movement of body parts that is
essential in coordinated activity).
We also remain confident that meaningful learning is a function of
tying new information to existing, well-rooted knowledge and physical
skills. And, we know most well-rooted knowledge and physical skills were
established through experience and practiced application. We understand
that it takes energy to learn and that learners must spend this energy
themselves; we cannot learn for them. We know motivation behaves like a
water hose to direct attention and release energy, and we know motivations
fluctuate up and down in response to situations, such as rising scores in a
game, an inspiring TED speaker, or boring e-learning.
We have considerable evidence that practice aids learning, and practice
spaced over time leads to more enduring memory and behavior patterns.
We also know:
• Examples are more effective when paired with counterexamples
• Worked problems provide clarity often missing from instructions
• Consequences shown in response to specific learner behaviors
elevate helpful emotional involvement, as well as greater
understanding, and do so more effectively than simple, right/wrong
feedback
For decades now, the Successive Approximations Model (SAM) has
been a remarkably effective process and alternative approach to designing
and building learner-centered learning experiences. It has been less widely
known and applied than it is today, so perhaps there’s been some change
here. Its value is now even more certain. Coverage of SAM in the first
edition of this book resulted in a flood of appreciative feedback, so it
What’s New?
3

remains a centerpiece of this edition as well, updated a bit from the work
we’ve done to prepare for workshops and webinars on the process and
from feedback from countless applications.
In summary, we really know quite a lot about human learning, effective
instruction, and instructional design. These long-standing foundational
concepts continue to offer valuable guidance. That’s why we can say: noth-
ing critical has changed, including the need for us all to pay greater atten-
tion to validated fundamentals. And, in this second edition, foundational
concepts remain in the spotlight. They are covered as straightforwardly as
I could manage.
Everything Has Changed
An alternate perspective—perhaps the more commonly held
perspective—is that so much has changed in the world of e-learning,
we are almost starting from a clean slate. The one correct aspect of that
assertion is that today one might not even recognize what’s going on in
the field of e-learning as an outgrowth of its origins.
In its infancy, instructional design for e-learning was taken very seri-
ously, the paradigms we used were an outgrowth of learning science, and
we carefully evaluated courseware before launching it to larger populations
of learners. Today, the prevalent notion is, “thank goodness, instructional
design isn’t that complicated. It’s not really a profession. Everyone can
develop good instruction. You just need to remember the six steps.”
Although I endeavor to help everyone attempting to design instruc-
tion to find ways to be effective, and I actually think many people
complicate the process unnecessarily, it’s very troublesome to see
so many do-it-yourself lists presented as sufficient guidelines to genuine
design integrity and excellence.
Let’s look at some of the changes frequently noted—the good, the bad,
and the very much unexpected.
Prevalence of e-Learning
One obvious change is that e-learning is no longer new or a novelty
for most organizations and institutions. Its use has spread broadly,
and there is a plethora of ways technology is used—all unfortu-
nately lumped in the category e-learning. Today, 77 percent of U.S.
companies offer e-learning in their professional development programs
4
Chapter 1

(Roland Berger, 2014). More than 80 percent of higher education
institutions offer at least several courses online, and more than half offer a
significant number of courses online (EDUCAUSE, 2013).
Low Expectations
In whatever capacity organizations have come to use e-learning, the
way they use it defines what e-learning is and, very often, what it should
and will be for them. In so many cases, initial unguided forays into
e-learning reduce delivery costs in the short-term, but achieve little in
terms of behavior change or performance improvement. e-Learning
has so many more capabilities and advantages than most people ever
recognize.
Lost Perspective
At the conception of e-learning, we tried to determine how effective
instruction could be delivered via computer technology (Allen, 2008).
Missing some of the capabilities of live instructors, but having its own
unique capabilities—such as the ability to accommodate needs of any
number of learners individually—we asked, Can e-learning be as effective
as typical classroom instruction? Could the e-learning experience be even more
effective than that delivered by an instructor? The exciting answers, proven
now through decades of experiments and applications, are yes and yes.
There was another important observation, too—a broadly evidenced
fact: There are many forms of e-learning that are not only poor substi-
tutes for live instruction, but also painfully ineffective and wasteful. Not
everything called e-learning has the same utility or capability. Just as not all
instructors are effective with the techniques they employ, not all e-learning
is effective with the instructional techniques implemented in it. And
complicating matters, some forms of e-learning are effective in some cir-
cumstances for some goals but not in other circumstances for other goals.
What’s changed? The change is that, many years after its conception,
people now think of e-learning as an instructional approach, whereas
e-learning is actually a delivery platform with an interesting set of
capabilities. The instructional design of experiences delivered through
e-learning reflects the instructional strategy or pedagogy and determines
effectiveness. Because e-learning can provide a wide variety of instruc-
tional experiences, it’s inappropriate to speak in terms of whether or not
e-learning is effective. A specific design must be evaluated in light of the
goals for which the e-learning was deployed. And, then the results, good
or bad, must be attributed only to the design, not to e-learning as a whole.
What’s New?
5

Yet we now deal with the problematic perception that e-learning is a
singular and often rather simplistic method of instruction, which is
nothing close to its potential.
Lost Expertise
Perhaps the most significant change is the number of people saddled
with the responsibility of creating e-learning having so little knowl-
edge of prior work. Whether enthusiastically delving into the field with
the confidence—I can do that!—or with the ambition to create better
e-learning than they’ve seen—or having been given the task because no
one else was available, many people today have to produce e-learning in
shorter and shorter time frames. They simply don’t have the time needed
to learn fundamentals of good design let alone become proficient at it.
Catering to the demand for instant training, providers of courseware
development tools suggest that building courseware is mostly about imple-
mentation as opposed to design. Anyone can build great instruction, “just
click here.” And people go for it. As a result, much invaluable knowledge
about appropriate and effective instructional design is ignored or buried
in the past, lost and forgotten.
New (Mobile) Delivery Options
Today, we further complicate the landscape by adding into the mix an
expanded variety of delivery technologies of which mobile devices are
presently receiving prominent attention. Because a delivery device is
mobile, do people learn differently? No, of course not. Despite the fact
that some developers of mobile applications claim mobility changes every-
thing, it doesn’t. And, excuse me, our reluctance to go along with the
new world stance isn’t because we’re not open to new possibilities; it’s
because mobility is just one new opportunity technology provides. It’s not
a panacea for all instruction.
Mobility does offer new possibilities that have great value for certain
goals and situations (for an overview of options and carefully considered
viewpoints on m-learning, see Quinn, 2011), but it doesn’t change the
most important factor: the instructional design, not the delivery technol-
ogy, determines effectiveness.
Mobility provides valuable conveniences and the ability to deliver some
learning experiences in real-life contexts, which is sometimes desirable and
sometimes very dangerous. We recognize the importance of context—the
critical importance of context for learning—but we also prize the possibility
of placing learners in multiple contexts and adjusting those contexts to
6
Chapter 1

provide a range of examples and challenges that enrich learning. Real-life
contexts cannot often be manipulated at practical speeds and costs just for
the purpose of instruction, or to meet the needs of each learner.
Questions About Mobile Delivery
With mobility, do we have a different
array of instructional approaches to
choose from?
To a degree, yes.
Are there more options to create
ineffective e-learning?
Unfortunately, yes. (Although, we had
plenty of ways to fall short already.)
Does mobility offer additional ways
e-learning can be of value?
Yes.
Is making the right instructional design
choice more important than ever?
Absolutely. With mobility, there are even
more ways to look clever and smart while
wasting time, money, and opportunity.
Could we ask the same questions of online video, social learning,
serious learning games, real-time simulations, and massive open online
courses, or MOOCs? For sure, yes.
And the answers? The same as above.
Mobile Performance Support versus
m-Learning
The value of mobility is not to be understated. It can, in fact, bring
great value by making other kinds of learning unnecessary. Used
as an on-the-spot source of reference material, such as a checklist or
a video demonstration, it can make it unnecessary to memorize the same
information through learning. The performer need only remember how
to access the guidelines or job aids needed to perform to expectations.
Even in this, the technology can assist by using either or both global
positioning data (GPS) and photographic recognition to look up
relevant resources.
This is, indeed, a change to the instructional landscape and a wel-
come opportunity. But when mobile devices are used for various types
of reference access and performance support, these uses should not be
called m-learning or any kind of learning. Something more like m-help or
m-guidance would be more accurate. This is a different domain with its
own challenges and opportunities and can be a welcome complement to
instructional systems.
What’s New?
7

Learning Games
Since the emergence of video games with their avid users and explosive
market, we stalwarts in e-learning have witnessed the fact that engaged
users will spend long sessions at the keyboard, and learn facts, skills, and
strategies for simply the satisfaction of conquest and touting all the fun
they’ve had doing it. This flies in the face of what too many pundits claim:
Today’s digital learners don’t have patience for anything beyond short
snippets of information. In many cases, what’s learned from entertainment
games has some general utility, such as problem recognition, problem
solving, and quick keyboard/controller skills. The major skills acquired
are, however, typically pertinent only to the game at hand. Yet the time
and effort is worth it to the millions of people who build and proudly
demonstrate superior game skills. If only we witnessed the same behavior,
outcome, and fun reported by e-learners.
e-Learning designers haven’t been blind to the coveted attributes
of computer games. In the early 1990s, a flood of “edutainment”
products hit the market, boasting fun learning. Unfortunately, the vast
majority of these products, delivered via CD-ROMs, were neither
instructional nor fun. A few succeeded, but what many designers
thought would be fun wasn’t. It was clear they didn’t understand what
makes games tick.
Our understanding of games has advanced immeasurably, although
groundwork was actually laid for game-based instructional design long
ago. The concept of applying the engaging and motivating aspects of
games to digital learning experiences, is even older than the work of
the 1990s, although you’d think from recent hyperbole the idea has just
dawned on us. For a bit of very interesting history, watch the videos at
the Computer History Museum covering work done in the 1970s on the
PLATO system, much of it looking and feeling like a game, and all of it
providing fun immersive and even addictive learning experiences. Here’s
the link to one: https://youtu.be/rdDwoUk4ojY.
In a later chapter on Serious Learning Games (SLGs), I’ll lay out
my new understanding of how to design instructional games that have
high impact and are really, truly fun. The exciting discovery for me in
this research is that both successful games and successful e-learning
experiences are actually built on the same components: context, challenge,
activity, and feedback (CCAF). And, further, that when game rules reflect
real life relationships between actions and consequences, we not only get
learners to work gleefully at skills development but also to develop skills
that have real life applicability and value.
8
Chapter 1

Social Learning
It’s a difficult challenge in creating instruction to think like a new
learner. When you have deep content knowledge and skills, you have
synthesized the content and recognize the interrelationships of its
components so well that you instantly see and act on patterns—patterns
that new learners are unable to detect. Recent learners may have an
easier time than experts when asked to unravel confusion and answer
questions from new learners. This presents an opportunity for social
learning.
Social learning builds on the multichannel digital communications at
hand today to facilitate access to people with helpful information—people
who can communicate at the right level. Peers working under the same
constraints and facing similar challenges can share how they deal with
issues and how they’ve adapted processes for greatest effectiveness.
Further, technology may embolden us to ask questions we might not
ask in face-to-face contexts. Learners can take their time to compose ques-
tions (as we can do with e-mail and texting) and converse in a protected
and relatively safe environment. In large organizations, and those with a
geographically distributed workforce, exchanges may offer the comfort of
anonymity, which may encourage others to disagree with answers given or
to offer alternative suggestions and expanded information.
Social learning can be very effective and valuable. As is always the case,
it has advantages and disadvantages. Not having to prepare courseware,
but just making a lot of information accessible sounds attractive. Letting
learners guide themselves instead of providing professional instructors
seems like a major reduction in training costs. But a risk of social learn-
ing is that, unmonitored poor practices can be perpetuated resulting in
something akin to the blind leading the blind. And, that more experienced
and knowledgeable people may not participate when needed. Exchanges
can become more social than instructive, absorbing big chunks of time.
Indeed, social learning doesn’t take instructional design off the hook;
social learning systems need organization, preparation, leadership, and
continuing participation by experts.
What’s Old Is New Again
With so many head-turning paradigms and technologies it could seem like
we need to start over again to determine what makes effective instruction.
Mobile delivery has become inexpensive and practical in a short span of
time. Published game frameworks make it easy simply to insert content here,
and in no time, you’re up and running with a game to present questions
What’s New?
9

and score results. Learners can easily communicate with one another,
access and exchange information, and download files.
People of many backgrounds, skills, and talents find themselves
involved in creating instructional applications because interactive
technology is more accessible than ever before. Creation tools that
emphasize speed and minimal instructional knowledge seduce the unwary
into instructional design roles where, although well-meaning, they are not
ready or able to make good design decisions.
There’s no doubt we are blessed with more ways than ever to help
people and organizations perform better. It’s all very exciting. At the same
time, even more expertise is required to choose an effective path—to avoid
what’s novel and new but not the best fit.
Unprepared courseware developers, with far too many instructional
models, tools, and delivery technologies are spurred on by eye-catching
examples that have great appeal, but actually miss most instructional
opportunities. This has created a new environment in our industry. And,
it is why my answer to the question What’s new? could well be everything.
And yet, the most important guidelines remain the enduring basics of what
we know about learning and performance. Through all these changes, it’s
more important than ever to be grounded in, and guided by, the basic
principles of human learning and performance.
Can This Book Make Sense
of It All?
For those who have undertaken serious study of human learning and
have extensive experience in technology-assisted learning, redirecting
the field onto more effective paths has become a pervasive challenge.
As always, I try to be pragmatic. I’ve hoped to help by linking theory,
research, and practice for those who need to build effective learning
applications. Although I would greatly enjoy a life of research on nuances
of instruction and learning, I find it abhorrent that millions of learners are
forced into boring, ineffective, time-wasting “lessons” when they could
be energetically developing valuable skills that would enhance self-worth,
self-confidence, and the ability to contribute meaningfully to pursuits of
their choice.
10
Chapter 1

It Doesn’t Have to Be Like This
Perhaps I’m overwrought about missed learning opportunities and poorly
used technology. Perhaps I’m taking this all too personally, and perhaps
most every well-balanced person feels poor instruction and wasted time
will always be a part of learning programs. Like it or not, no one should
get agitated about it. No big deal. That’s life.
But I just can’t accept this. It doesn’t have to be like this. e-Learning
can be so much better. If it were, it could change our world for the bet-
ter. Seriously. It matters when people have marketable skills and can
reduce economic disparity. It matters when people understand the his-
tory and values of nations—their own and others. It matters when people
can communicate in a common language, understand one another, tackle
common problems, and share their insights. And it matters when people
give up, thinking they can’t learn.
When technology entered the exclusive domain of live teachers,
interacting face to face with their students, many reacted to the intrusion
with fear and pushed back in understandable ways. There needed to be
proof that the pros outweighed the cons before letting technology take
responsibility for teaching their students. So, extensive exploratory work
began. It became clear that, with proper design, extraordinary learning
opportunities were, in fact, feasible. Further, technology made it possible
to deliver consistently great learning experiences to very large populations
of learners. Amortizing costs across larger numbers of learners would
afford far more time and expertise in preparation of content and still
produce learning experiences that cost very little per learner. In short, the
cost per student could be far less than traditional classroom instruction
and the learning experience far better.
Lower Costs, Better Learning
Delivery costs are less today—far less than the sum cost of classrooms,
teacher salaries, travel, materials, and other components of traditional
training and instruction, costs that have risen and will continue to rise.
Organizations have not missed this point, but many have taken a tragic
turn. Instead of using a portion of the savings provided by e-learning to
produce higher-quality learning experiences that would lead to valuable
performance contributions in return, they rejoice at initial overhead cost
reductions and continue to squeeze design and development costs. The
result is that e-learning is often not much better than a data sheet or a
What’s New?
11

manual on the screen, perhaps with a 10-item quiz included. Better than
nothing? Perhaps, but not much better.
So, I am agitated. Poorly designed, boring e-learning is not
something I endure easily because it’s so unnecessary and hard to justify.
It just makes no sense to me. It’s very hard to sit by when every learning
opportunity could lead to a beneficial and enjoyable experience, available
worldwide and systematically improving as better ideas were incorporated.
Contrast this vision with today’s common practice of haphazardly thrown
together courses that waste learner time, frustrate learners, and cause
some to despair of their abilities and lose what small interest they might
have had in the topic.
With delivery of instruction via e-learning being so inexpensive,
e-learning on a wide range of topics should really be free to all. We should
strive for this. But in the present situation, e-learning should be better
than it is—more inspiring, more fun, more effective, more meaningful,
more memorable, more motivational. It’s hard to accept excuses for it
being otherwise.
Bill Norris
Bill Norris, CEO of Control Data Corporation
nourished the famous PLATO project—a
system that was far ahead of its time
in terms of e-learning. He wanted (and
tried) to fund pretty much anyone who
wanted to develop e-learning, because
across the globe there were populations
of people interested in every topic. When
a ﬁrst version of an e-learning course
became widely accessible, he applauded
the start and expected others would help
improve it. Through what we now call
crowd-accelerated innovation, he expected
courseware to evolve continuously, reﬂecting the inspiration and wisdom of the
world’s best experts and teachers. Once the idea that freely sharing knowledge
and skills became a recognized human value, he expected this somewhat utopian
vision to be realized through funding for courseware from many sources, public
and private, and through contributions of time and creativity from people who
just want to help others. I shared this vision with Mr. Norris in my work on the
PLATO system and on Authorware, and continue to believe wholeheartedly that
it can be realized.
12
Chapter 1

No Excuses, Please
My thesis is this: Instructional design is a profession requiring study and
mentored practice to achieve excellence. If learners are going to exchange
their time for the learning outcomes an instructional event provides, we
have an obligation to make that time productive. It doesn’t take many
learners for the accumulated usage time to become significant. Employers
need to take note here that broadcasting poor instruction quickly becomes
a huge expense in both direct costs of employee time (even without factoring
in costs of delivery) and indirect costs of missed opportunities because
people were in training and unavailable to work. As the number of students
rises, the need to make instruction effective becomes paramount; yet,
decision makers who insist on frittering money away on hastily produced,
time-wasting training somehow overlook this, preferring to ask how much
training costs can be reduced further.
But here’s the good news. Simple principles and an effective
process can help create much better learning activities than those we
typically see. The weak designs so prevalent in the field are really so
deplorable that even the application of a few principles and a process
change would help a lot. I would personally relish seeing continuous
advancement in our most sophisticated approaches. Certainly, there are
important investigations being undertaken at various universities and
corporate centers, but the greatest benefits probably will be made by
improving the oceans of ineffectual applications at the lower end of the
spectrum. Here’s where people are making unnecessary, fundamental
errors—the prevention of which costs nearly nothing. Here’s where I
think I and this book can help most, although I’ve included much material
I believe is of value across the spectrum of design experience, from novice
to sophisticated pro.
New Examples
While the first edition of this book had a good and useful collection
of examples (many readers told me the examples were invaluable
to them), it seemed only fitting to reward readers of this second edition
with an updated collection. Admittedly, it was somewhat difficult to
improve on the initial collection, but they were built in older technology
and were not able to do all the things we can do so easily now. So one last
element of change is found in new examples, although I had to hold on
to some of my old favorites that illustrate concepts so clearly and seem to
have timeless value.
What’s New?
13

Ready?
So, the table is set. We’re going to look at ways to design and produce
e-learning you can be proud of. We will identify fundamental concepts
that will enable you to do an excellent job with whatever resources, time,
and money you have. We’ll take advantage of technology, but we won’t let
technology mask poor designs. And we’ll produce for our organizations
performance improvements that will justify every penny of their support.
14
Chapter 1

