

© 2022 ASTD DBA the Association for Talent Development (ATD)
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America.
25 24 23 22               1 2 3 4 5
No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, or transmitted in any
form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, information storage and
retrieval systems, or other electronic or mechanical methods, without the prior
written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embodied
in critical reviews and certain other noncommercial uses permitted by copyright
law. For permission requests, please go to copyright.com, or contact Copyright
Clearance Center (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923 (telephone:
978.750.8400; fax: 978.646.8600).
ATD Press is an internationally renowned source of insightful and practical
information on talent development, training, and professional development.
ATD Press
1640 King Street
Alexandria, VA 22314 USA
Ordering information: Books published by ATD Press can be purchased by visiting
ATD’s website at td.org/books or by calling 800.628.2783 or 703.683.8100.
Virtual Trainer Capability Model © 2022 Howles Associates LLC. All rights
reserved.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2021952824
ISBN-10: 1-953946-03-8
ISBN-13: 978-1-953946-03-4
e-ISBN: 978-1-953946-04-1
ATD Press Editorial Staff
Director: Sarah Halgas
Manager: Melissa Jones
Content Manager, Learning Technology: Alexandria Clapp
Developmental Editor: Jack Harlow
Production Editor: Hannah Sternberg
Text Design: Shirley E.M. Raybuck
Cover Design: Rose Richey
Text Layout: Kathleen Dyson
Printed by BR Printers, San Jose, CA
7

Contents
Preface: “The Night Before Training”
Acknowledgments
Introduction
Chapter 1     Introducing the Virtual Trainer Capability
Model
Chapter 2     Designing Virtual Learning Experiences
Chapter 3     Shaping a Successful Virtual Learning
Environment
Chapter 4     Applying the Secrets of Effective Online
Facilitation
Chapter 5     Developing Your Professional On-Camera
Competence
Chapter 6     Enhancing Facilitator Presence Through
Audio and Vocal Delivery
Chapter 7     Leveraging Your Platform’s Technical Tools
Chapter 8     Following the Dynamic Principle of
Engagement
Chapter 9     Troubleshooting and Recovering With
Agility
Chapter 10   Evaluating and Innovating in the Virtual
Space
Chapter 11   Flipping Virtual Training With Blended
Learning
Chapter 12   Combining Online and On-Site Learners in
Live Mixed Learning

References
Index
About the Author

Preface: “The Night Before
Training”
by Diana L. Howles
’Twas the morn of a weekday,
When throughout virtual space,
Each learner logged in,
With anticipation on their face.
They grabbed cups of coffee,
Clicked their join link with care,
In hopes their facilitator,
Soon would be there.
And I in my home office,
Nestled snug in my seat,
Dressed professional on top,
But in yoga pants with bare feet.
My producer joined too,
With a ring light in tow,
Settling in for virtual training,
Musing how it might go.
When more rapid than fire,
From across the globe, they all came,
We welcomed them onscreen,
And greeted them by name.
But then to my surprise,

There arose such a clatter,
I checked the participant panel,
To see what was the matter.
We heard dogs barking, adults talking,
Kids screaming down the hall,
I asked learners to mute,
To be less distracting for all.
They turned on their cameras,
But their silhouettes—how shrouded,
Their headroom—too spacious,
Their backgrounds—so crowded.
They posted chats, clicked reactions,
Raised virtual hands at will,
But when I asked a discussion question,
I heard crickets; all was still.
Then what to their wondering ears,
did they hear,
But my producer and I saying,
“Breakouts are near!”
Away to their breakouts,
They tried to join in a flash,
It worked on the third try,
Which was quite the mad dash.
Learners brainstormed on whiteboards,
With colleagues so dear,
Then returned to the main session,
To debrief with good cheer.
But then to my astonishment,

What did my bewildered eyes see?
I lost my internet connection,
No one could hear me!
I hurried to network settings,
Heartbeat racing—what was wrong?
It looked like an outage,
But I didn’t know for how long.
I texted my producer,
To forge ahead without me,
Found the hotspot on my phone,
And reconnected with plan B.
But the end of virtual training,
Had finally drawn near,
And my producer and I realized,
There was nothing left to fear.
We wanted to learn from these lessons,
Take our training to the next level,
Because that would be something,
In which we could revel.
So, close whiteboard,
Clear annotations,
Tidy desks where we sat.
Close poll results,
Stop screen sharing,
Post evaluation link in chat.
And I heard learners exclaim,
As they smiled real cute,
“It’s a good thing we read lips,

’cause you’re … still on mute!”

Acknowledgments
As the popular proverb reminds us, it takes a village to raise a
child. Naturally, it also takes a village to craft a book from
scratch. I would like to thank my treasured village for their
contributions to this project. To begin, my deepest gratitude
goes to the amazing virtual learning clients with whom I have
worked over the years. You inspire me daily, and it has been a
true privilege to work together in virtual space. Special thanks
also to Huw Newton-Hill, Dean Stewart, Kelly Eno, David
Gering, Vanessa Dennen, Kari Word, Ömer Arslan, Katherine
Dalland, Kim Huettl, Michael Sitte, Laura V. Page, and
Melissa Albrecht for their input, contributions, and willingness
to share their expertise and work experience. As always, I am
grateful to Michelle Sanders for her beautiful graphics. Special
thanks also to Heidi Gering, Dawn Dorning, and Kailey
Gering for their willingness to assist with illustrative
examples.
Additionally, I am grateful to the virtual training platform
vendors who graciously granted permission to share
screenshots of their products. They include InSpace, Zoom,
Adobe Connect, Webex, and LogMeIn. A special thank you to
Matt Pierce at TechSmith Corporation, Kortney Clark at
SkillPath, and Articulate Global for generously allowing us to
showcase their work and/or products. Finally, much gratitude
is extended to Michael @relaxdaily, whose lovely piano music
played in the background for most of the writing of this work:
youtube.com/relaxdaily.
I am also indebted to the entire ATD publishing team for
their tireless efforts and exemplary commitment to quality. I
am especially thankful to my exceptional editorial team. To
my talented editor, Jack, thank you for continuing to challenge
me at every stage to improve the manuscript. It is because of

your expertise and experience that I have learned much about
clarity, consistency, and coherence. To my production editor,
Hannah, your enthusiasm for the project and your professional
excellence are truly inspiring. Thank you for making the final
product immeasurably better with your thorough and
thoughtful edits. To my content manager, Alexandria, thank
you for believing in this project and believing in me from the
very beginning. Your championing and constructive feedback
have been invaluable.
Most of all, I extend a heartfelt thank you first and foremost
to Les, Karra, Casey, Susie, Lowell, Thomas A., and JJ,
without whom this book could not have been written. You are
my heart, and your support has been my constant companion,
sustaining me throughout this exciting endeavor.

Introduction
“I keep on making what I can’t do yet in order to learn to be
able to do it.”
—Vincent van Gogh, artist
The year was 2000. The large financial organization I worked
for had recently purchased a new web conferencing platform. I
was a corporate trainer at the time and remember being
amazed as I watched an IT colleague demonstrate how it
worked. She showed us how real-time collaboration and
communication was possible from anywhere, anytime. Later,
my manager suggested this could be a way for us to connect
remotely with field staff, train internal staff, and educate
external customers. I began using the platform to train
employees and customers, and presented on the technology at
company conferences to showcase what was possible. As a
seasoned in-person trainer, I found this fresh online medium
fascinating. It may have been the combination of technology
and multimedia, the fact that it was a challenge, or the novelty
of it all, but something deep down in me seemed to intuitively
know it could be a game changer. Simply put, I was hooked.
And now, more than two decades later, I still find the live
online learning medium exciting and brimming with
possibility for greater innovation and opportunity. I strive to
challenge myself to continually improve, with frequent
reminders to step back so I can view things in new ways,
discard what doesn’t work, and eagerly build upon what does.
It’s also exciting to watch modern virtual training tools rapidly
improve. We are fortunate to have many more affordances
than we did before.
A Brief Virtual Training Case Study

Recently, I met with a new US client via video call to learn
more about their organization, and how I might assist. They
had requested a virtual training class on professional online
presence for all their employees. Some staff were local and
worked from home and in the office, while others worked out
of state. More than 95 percent of their customer meetings were
online, and many were on camera. As we talked about key
concepts we could address, the organization’s leaders and staff
management assured me they would have conversations with
staff afterward about key principles that could be incorporated
into their development plans. Because this organization
already used Zoom, we decided to deliver training via this
platform. A week before the session, I met with my client
contact to ensure our shared technology was working as
expected. The following week, my client—who also offered to
play the producer role—logged in early with me to ensure all
was working correctly so I could post a welcome in chat,
prepare my whiteboard, pull up supporting visuals, check the
quality of my audio, frame myself on camera, and be ready for
participants to join.
As the training program began, I was intentional about
creating a welcoming environment and mindful of the energy I
was projecting. Knowing enthusiasm takes a hit online, I tried
to generate twice my normal energy level. At the same time, I
was strategic. I knew the reasons behind what I was asking
learners to do each moment and where I hoped it would lead
the group at large. For example, I helped learners warm up
their participation in a fun and easy way. I asked them to post
in chat what footwear they were currently wearing (such as
barefoot, slippers, socks, or shoes). Behind the scenes, my real
intention was to ensure everyone successfully posted a chat.
Once they did this, I knew they would be much more likely to
chat again during the forthcoming substantive learning
activities, primarily because they had already done it.
Throughout the virtual training, I was also intentional about
being conversational and using a natural inflection in my voice
to create more interest. I customized the session by offering
examples from the organization and using their business lingo,
which I had learned during the preliminary calls. When they

divided into small breakout groups, they were able to critique
and apply some of the key points of online presence that we
had discussed. I listened carefully to what participants said and
spoke their first names aloud when connecting back to their
previous comments. I genuinely complimented their insights
and verbally rewarded their contributions to encourage more
of the same.
At one point, I paused to ask a specific question so
participants could stop and think. No one responded initially,
and some silence followed. However, knowing the value of
giving learners space to think, I waited several seconds more,
and sure enough, a learner came off mute to share her
thoughts, and then more shared after that. By the end, the
participants had joyfully discovered what they didn’t know
about what they didn’t know. Going forward, leadership
agreed to hold follow-up conversations with staff and
incorporate takeaways into development plans as part of their
ongoing performance review discussions.
In this example, you’ve read about the wide range of
opportunities 
available 
to 
virtual 
trainers 
to 
engage
participants as well as the diversity of capabilities required to
create the most effective learning experience. All of this and
more will be covered in this book.
The Joy and the Rise of Virtual Training
Part of the fun of virtual training is that although you
thoroughly prepare ahead of time, once you go live, anything
can happen. This is part of its adventurous nature. Because of
this, flexibility is key. For instance, during the session you
might need to adjust your original order of content, remove an
activity on the fly, add something relevant you think of in the
moment, speed up a bit because you’re falling behind
schedule, or extend chat time because the rich discussion is
going so well. Regardless, live online learning is an adventure
that certainly benefits from preparation but must also be
approached with openness. In this way, it truly becomes a
unique journey between you and your learners as it unfolds in
real time.

Although live online training has been a credible delivery
platform for more than two decades, it experienced widespread
adoption during the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2020 and 2021,
when many employees from global organizations worked from
home, virtual training platforms and web conferencing use
skyrocketed. According to an ATD research report, 92 percent
of the more than 430 organizations surveyed identified health,
safety, and travel concerns from the pandemic as the top
reasons for using virtual training platforms. Nearly all
surveyed had converted some traditional classroom training to
virtual training during the pandemic (ATD 2021). Millions
quickly adopted technologies to support synchronous training
across time and distance. Not only could employees now work
from anywhere, but virtual facilitators could also train from
anywhere. Zoom, for example, became one of those widely
adopted platforms. After completing its first quarter, Zoom
predicted annual revenue of $4 billion for fiscal year 2021,
which was up approximately 50 percent from 2020. And when
the pandemic first began, Zoom’s revenue quadrupled from
2019 to 2020 (Liedtke 2021).
As organizations continue to embrace hybrid work models,
their reliance on video conferencing and virtual training
platforms for professional development remains. Suffice to
say, online learning and virtual training are here to stay.
Next Level Virtual Training
Just as organizations scrambled to manage the transition to
working remotely during the COVID-19 pandemic, so too did
talent development functions. They were required to manage
the shift of their in-person learning and development offerings
to virtual. This meant trainers, facilitators, and educators
needed to quickly learn or relearn some basic virtual training
skills to keep their programs running and their customers
learning. Often, they were looking for guidance just to keep
their heads above water. Because we no longer live in a world
where workplace training occurs 100 percent in-person, talent
development professionals cannot settle for novice skills. To
continue to best serve their organizations, learners, and

customers, they will need to take their abilities to the next
level.
So, what does it mean to go from basic to the next level?
There is a difference between going through the motions as a
virtual trainer and truly excelling by doing your best work. To
guide professional development toward excellence, this book
introduces you to the Virtual Trainer Capability Model, which
identifies eight areas of expertise for the top virtual
professional. Working toward proficiency in all these skills
represents the full range of what it means to facilitate at the
next level. Skill mastery in only one of these areas is not
sufficient.
Who Should Read This Book?
Maybe you have been facilitating online for a few years but
are now ready to move beyond the basics. Or perhaps you are
familiar with available tools and virtual platforms, and you
want to learn how to hone your craft even more. Do you find
yourself asking, “What can I do to develop my live online
facilitator skills?” “How can I be a more effective designer for
virtual training?” “What other skills do I need?” “What else do
I need to know about being a modern facilitator in a hybrid
work environment?” or “What does a virtual trainer’s
development path look like?”
If you professionally facilitate live online learning, this
book is for you. You might refer to yourself as a virtual trainer,
a live online facilitator, a synchronous educator, an online
adult education instructor, an instructional designer, a learning
experience designer, or something similar. In this book, I use
both virtual trainer and virtual facilitator interchangeably.
Developers, evaluators, and producers of virtual training or
online adult education will also find this helpful.
This book intentionally goes beyond the basics. Much of the
existing body of work on the subject addresses the foundations
of virtual training such as what virtual training is, its key
features, how to make the business case for adopting virtual
training, how to select a platform, how to transition from
instructor-led to online learning, how to set up your

workstation, tools and exercises, and how to prepare
participants, facilitators, and producers. These excellent
contributions have established a solid foundation and body of
knowledge for the profession. Now there is a need to
modernize and provide a framework for professional growth
that builds upon and goes beyond what is currently written on
the topic.

How Will This Book Help You?
This book will teach you how to advance beyond the basics of
virtual training and online synchronous instruction. In doing
so, it introduces a capability model for synchronous
facilitators, applies learning experience design to live online
learning, provides an in-depth chapter on how to develop on-
camera competence as a virtual trainer, and addresses the dos
and the don’ts of combining on-site and online learners in
hybrid training classes.
Importantly, this book is more about actionable tips,
techniques, and strategies, rather than the technology itself.
Technology changes, but solid principles for how to use it do
not. I’ve personally used many platforms over the past
decades, including PlaceWare (which later became Microsoft
Office Live Meeting), InterWise, HorizonLive, Elluminate
Live!, NetMeeting, Macromedia’s Breeze Meeting, Digitell,
RingCentral, Blackboard Collaborate, Microsoft Teams,
GoToTraining, Webex, Adobe Connect, and Zoom. Most
platforms share common tools. Regardless of which platform
you or your organization uses, you want to keep yourself up-
to-date and do your best to leverage the affordances of each
platform.
As virtual trainers and educators, we experience how deeply
rewarding it is to help learners journey toward that aha
moment. In a similar vein, it is my deepest hope that this book
pushes you further than you thought possible, and you are
inspired by new ideas that then trigger new ideas of your own.
Take and apply the nuggets that resonate with you to help you
tune and polish your craft.
Chapter 1 introduces you to the Virtual Trainer Capability
Model, which identifies eight key areas of expertise. It is
intended to serve as a framework for your professional
development. These areas of expertise are:
• Experience design
• Environment shaping
• Online facilitation

• Facilitator presence
• Technical fluency
• Dynamic engagement
• Agile troubleshooting
• Evaluating impact
Chapter 2 focuses on the first virtual training capability:
experience design. This skill set challenges you to approach
the design of virtual training as an overarching experience
from pre-class assignments all the way to post-class follow-up.
You will learn how to include target learners in the design
process and collect their valuable perspectives on course
design. As learning designers, you also want to create learning
experiences that integrate all the learning dimensions:
cognitive, emotional, social, and behavioral.
Chapter 3 describes how to cultivate a successful virtual
environment that is conducive to learning. To do this we focus
on the second capability: environment shaping. Facilitators
must build community by leveraging the social experience
dimension and creatively sourcing ways for learners to
connect and discover shared commonality. Just as facilitators
shape learning environments, so do environments shape
learners and their overall online experience.
Chapter 4 delves into strategies to take your online
facilitation capability up a notch. You may be familiar with the
basics of facilitation but are now ready to try some advanced
techniques. You will learn how to make the invisible audible
and increase learner agency. Skilled facilitators also need to
place learners at the center as they guide them to be co-
creators of their own learning.
Chapter 5 provides in-depth professional tips on how to
develop on-camera competency as a live online facilitator (the
facilitator presence capability). You’ll learn, for example, how
to use the three-finger rule for framing. Although facilitators
do not need to always be on camera, they should still know
how to professionally polish their on-camera presence during
purposeful connection moments.

Chapter 6 focuses on what you can do to further enhance
your facilitator presence by improving audio quality and vocal
delivery. Techniques include speaking with an informal,
conversational style, using personal pronouns, and tips on how
to slow your speaking rate. Learn how to improve facilitator
presence by taking small actions to adjust audio quality and
your voice.
Chapter 7 discusses how to refine your technical fluency.
Facilitators need to strategically leverage tools in today’s
virtual training platforms to help achieve their desired learning
outcomes. For example, just using a poll for the sake of using
a poll can be a missed opportunity for building curiosity,
checking knowledge, encouraging reflection, or providing
immediate corrective feedback. This chapter explores the tools
available in a facilitator’s modern tool box and how to use
them at the right time for the right reason with the right
activity.
Chapter 8 details new ways to leverage movement to your
advantage when training online with the sixth capability:
dynamic engagement. For example, you will learn how to
employ strategies to avoid learner habituation as well as how
to draw attention rather than lose it. Facilitators will learn to
leverage the power of movement in multiple ways to engage
learners throughout virtual sessions.
Chapter 9 offers a framework for agile troubleshooting by
addressing the technological challenges that can often occur.
You will learn what you can do to minimize or alleviate the
risk of things going wrong, manage the expected and
unexpected, and keep training moving forward. For example,
if you encounter a complex technical issue, have a ready-
made, topic-relevant assignment in your back pocket to assign
learners. This gives participants a related learning activity they
can do independently, as a group on a whiteboard, or via
paired chat while you or your producer troubleshoot.
Chapter 10 discusses the importance of evaluating impact
and whether your live online sessions met their goals. This
involves collecting data on the effectiveness of your virtual
training program, so you can examine its effect from the

learners’ reactions to the training all the way to the broader
impact on the organization. You’ll want to measure the value
of virtual training based on initial learning objectives, as well
as what matters most to the learners, their managers, and your
stakeholders. This chapter also explores the possibilities for
future innovation in the industry.
Chapter 11 explores how to craft effective blended learning
solutions. This chapter does not focus exclusively on one
capability; instead it includes them all. It addresses how to
successfully 
pair 
synchronous 
online 
training 
with
asynchronous 
components 
to 
maximize 
learning’s
effectiveness. For example, you might offload independent
activities like podcasts, reading articles, videos, infographics,
on-demand tutorials, or reflection exercises as asynchronous
elements to supplement virtual training classes as part of the
overall training program. You’ll also find evidence-based
research supporting blended learning’s superiority when it
comes to improving learning outcomes.
Chapter 12 explores the unique challenge of hybrid or live
mixed learning where virtual facilitators train learners
concurrently who are both online and on-site in real time. To
succeed in this environment, you’ll need to tap into all the
capabilities 
covered 
in 
the 
book. 
We 
will 
explore
considerations like using a lead facilitator in one location and
a co-facilitator in another, keeping class size small, and
adapting learning activities for both locations. Whether live
mixed learning is appropriate for your organization depends
on the technology you must have to support it, your ability to
source multiple facilitators, and your design flexibility, ability
to keep total class size small, and access to additional IT
support.
As you advance through the book, each chapter also begins
by highlighting “The Big Idea.” Scan them to quickly identify
which chapters are most relevant to you and your work. In
addition to the big ideas and capability model, there are also
101 next level tips scattered throughout the book. These are
actionable, and you can immediately begin practicing and
applying them. A convenient summary of all prescriptive tips
discussed can be found at the end of each chapter.

Become the Best Virtual Trainer You Can Be
As is true with everything in the professional training space,
the end goal is learning transfer. We want to ensure virtual
training participants apply what they’ve learned to their jobs
and, ultimately, their workplaces and organizations. To that
end, this book serves as a train-the-trainer resource for those
who design and facilitate virtual training. Elevating virtual
training design and delivery capabilities can have a ripple
effect on virtual participants’ learning and application and the
impact of learning on their organizations.
Online facilitators and learning designers are essential to
upskilling the global workforce. My goal is to challenge you to
upskill yourself first and to raise the bar in both quality and
skill. Hopefully, you will find this book to be a gem you can
reference for novel ideas, practical tips, inspiration, helpful
frameworks, evidence-based research, and professional
development.
Because virtual training is here to stay, let’s learn from
evidence-based 
research, 
best 
practices, 
recommended
strategies and techniques, and modern technology tools so we
can make a difference for our learners, our organizations, and
our global community. I welcome your feedback on this book
and would love to hear from you. I consider it a privilege to
invest in your professional success and thank you for reading.
The challenge is to move from just getting by to doing your
best work. So together, let’s make the learning and
development (L&D) world a better place. May the journey
begin!
To your virtual success,
Diana L. Howles
linkedin.com/in/dianahowles
@DianaHowles

“The learning field is still struggling to create true and
meaningful engagement activities that enhance learners’
outcomes. We know how to use the various sub-tools in these
platforms, ranging from polls to whiteboards to chat to
breakout sessions. … I want to get smarter about how, when,
why, duration, style, and options for engagement activities.”
—Elliott Masie, Chair of the Learning COLLABORATIVE
and CEO of The MASIE Center (2021)

Introducing the Virtual
Trainer Capability Model
Virtual training has become ubiquitous. “Online education is
here to stay … and can make an organization more future-
proof” (ul Haq 2021). Its use also continues to grow
exponentially. “A May 2020 forecast from Global Market
Insights predicts that virtual classroom technology will grow
at a compound annual growth rate of 11 percent between 2020
and 2026, faster than the overall learning category average of
8 percent” (Bersin 2020).
Trends also show the traditional in-person classroom in a
diminishing role compared with virtual training. ATD’s 2020
State of the Industry reported that the use of traditional
instructor-led classrooms for training declined to 40 percent in
2019 after averaging around 50 percent in prior years (ATD
2020). Virtual training in 2019 already showed rapid growth
accounting for 19 percent of total learning, a 100 percent
increase from 2012–2018 (ATD 2020). This use then
skyrocketed during the COVID-19 pandemic beginning in
2020 with widespread virtual training adoption due to the shift
to remote work for many organizations. In early 2021, for
example, 98 percent of organizations surveyed reported using
some virtual training, and 88 percent predicted their virtual
training budgets would either remain as is or even increase in
2022 (ATD 2021). This is yet another strong indicator that
virtual training is likely to continue well into the foreseeable
future as a top training venue. Because of its popularity and
widespread use, more skilled online facilitators and virtual
trainers are needed.

Upskilling (building skills for a current role) and reskilling
(building skills for a new role) are top priorities now for
organizations across a variety of industries. As organizations
shifted from mostly working on-site to mostly working from
home and then transitioned back to hybrid work models, the
tremendous need to upskill and reskill grew. According to
LinkedIn Learning’s 2020 Workplace Learning Report,
“digital transformation is catalyzing an upskilling and
reskilling revolution” (Van Nuys 2020). In 2021, LinkedIn
Learning reported upskilling and reskilling as the number-one
area of focus for L&D programs according to more than 1,200
learning professionals from over 25 countries. For example,
Amazon was investing more than $700 million to train and
upskill employees, and PwC was spending $3 billion to upskill
employees over the next several years with the mantra “New
World, New Skills” (Van Nuys 2021).
Employees are also being tasked with doing more with less
because of the Great Resignation, a term attributed to
Professor Anthony Klotz from Texas A&M University (Kane
2021). The Great Resignation describes the mass exodus of
employees from their previous employers that ensued in the
US and in some European countries in 2021 in the wake of the
COVID-19 pandemic. According to the US Department of
Labor, 11.5 million employees in the US voluntarily left their
jobs in the spring and early summer of 2021 (Kane 2021). This
mass workforce departure has been linked to employees
rethinking priorities during the pandemic and choosing to
leave jobs due to burnout, stress, exhaustion, family demands,
the desire to try something new, or to actively pursue a
professional or personal dream.
Replacing these departing workers requires reskilling.
Equipping current employees to close gaps left behind requires
reskilling. And promoting individual contributors into
leadership positions requires reskilling. So, who and how will
these reskilling and upskilling efforts be delivered? Much of it
relies heavily on learning and development departments, and
virtual training will most likely be the top training delivery
method. Because much of the workforce continues to work

from anywhere, virtual training is more conducive to hybrid
and remote work.
With its rapid growth and widespread adoption, virtual
training is now a core business skill for learning and
development professionals. However, for virtual training
professionals to best support employee skill development,
facilitators, designers, developers, and producers must also
hone their own skills. Due to rapidly changing technologies,
multiple platforms, widespread global adoption of vILT, and
popular hybrid workplace models, the role of a virtual trainer
has become even more challenging. Couple this with 24/7
distractions and temptations to multitask, and the challenges
multiply.
To rise and face these challenges, learning leaders, virtual
trainers, designers, developers, and producers must operate at
higher levels of excellence. Whether or not they do will either
support or hinder their ability to improve employee
proficiencies, close gaps in workplace performance, and equip
staff for new or current roles. Regardless of your experience
with traditional in-person training, virtual training requires
new and expanded skills to be successful. Now is the time to
upskill and grow your capabilities as a virtual training
professional.
But where should you start? What skills or abilities are most
important beyond knowing how to use the tools a platform
offers? How can you become an expert who knows how and
why certain engagement activities should or should not be
used? What if you have been delivering online training for a
year or two but now desire to move past just getting by to
doing your best work? This book is here to help you by
outlining all the core capabilities essential to upskilling
yourself, along with multiple strategies and tips to take your
virtual training to the next level.
THE BIG IDEA
Use the Virtual Trainer Capability Model to
professionally upskill in eight core areas of
development.

The Virtual Trainer Capability Model
In my 20 years as a virtual trainer, I sought out best practices
by experimenting, observing, researching, and tweaking
strategies used in my own virtual classes and from what I
observed in other classes. I tried to learn from my mistakes. If
there were techniques that didn’t work well, I analyzed why
and modified them. If strategies worked well, I replicated them
in other classes and tried to expand on them. For example, I
observed that participants seemed more willing to participate
in whiteboards than in chat with earlier technology platforms
because writing on whiteboards back then was always
anonymous. Contrast this with chat where their colleagues
could see their names and who said what. So, I realized I
needed to use the whiteboards to get everyone to think more
deeply about core concepts when responding to thoughtful
questions because they’d be more willing to participate if I
emphasized that their typing was anonymous. I also studied
media like radio to learn what lessons might transfer well to
virtual training. I remember advocating for virtual trainers to
partner with a co-facilitator because two voices working
together (like what you might hear in radio interviews or
podcasts) creates greater vocal variety and interest.
This observation, analysis, and experience helped me hone
my own virtual training skill set. But what really helped me
transition to the next level was my development across
multiple areas of expertise. For example, it was essential I
become technically literate with each platform I used. To train
effectively, not only did I need to know every tool at my
disposal but also discern which learning activities would work
best with each. Paired with this technology know-how, I also
needed to troubleshoot technical issues when they emerged.
Over the years, I witnessed a variety of platforms come and go
with common features and some variations, but generally there
were only slight changes to these tools and platforms.
However, the more universal adoption of virtual training
throughout the COVID-19 pandemic prompted rapid, frequent,
and substantive updates to several virtual training platforms
across the industry. It was important to stay fluent in my
knowledge of these improvements.

Another development area of expertise for me was verbal
communication skills. In the early days of using web
conferencing software for training, we relied heavily on audio,
not video. Video was available, but it was usually a tiny
window in the corner of the screen and, because of limited
bandwidth, the quality was not very good. So, many of us
displayed a still picture of ourselves in that corner instead and
relied mostly on our voices. As video technology began to
improve, I started heavily researching the on-camera medium.
This led to me to establish a sense of presence vocally and
visually, recognizing how important that was for learners. I
was very aware also that developing a professional on-camera
presence was a new literacy for many. Around 2015, I began
researching and training professionals on how to best use
multimedia to support learning.
Also integral to my own professional development was
learning how to facilitate in a virtual environment. There were
clearly some differences in the online medium, although we
could leverage some in-person facilitation skills. And, of
course, cultivating an online environment for learners that was
supportive and inclusive became a top priority as well. Finally,
because I used to teach public speaking at the university level,
I knew there were strategic techniques for designing and
displaying visual aids, and that this was especially important
in virtual training with its multimedia options.
More recently, it occurred to me that a comprehensive
framework to guide virtual trainers’ professional development
was missing. We develop others, but we sometimes forget to
develop ourselves. And so, I created the Virtual Trainer
Capability Model. As I embarked on this journey, the
foundational question I used to guide framework development
was, “What is most important for live online practitioners to
know and be able to do?”
I based the model on my own virtual training experience,
research studies in the field, the existing body of published
work on the subject, and input and reaction from trusted
colleagues. The intent was to create a comprehensive
development path toward full competence in essential areas of
expertise. Initially, the model began as a list of 16 capabilities.

As I ran these categories by respected colleagues in the field,
measured them against research, and weighed them against my
own experience, I eventually narrowed the list down. To be
honest, it was with great struggle and much iterative work that
the current model emerged. In sum, the Virtual Trainer
Capability Model identifies eight major areas that address the
most important knowledge and skills virtual trainers and
online facilitators need to be successful. These capabilities will
guide your professional development and prepare your current
and future readiness.
The target users of the model are those who design and
facilitate live online classes. This may include virtual training
facilitators and trainers, learning designers and developers,
producers, online instructors, adult educators, and professors
who teach online classes. By growing your knowledge and
skills in these eight core capabilities, you will elevate yourself
from novice to expert.
Just as puzzle pieces play a role contributing to the whole,
the eight capability areas also comprise a whole. This is why
the model is visually depicted as puzzle pieces (Figure 1-1).
The model’s circular shape communicates how connected each
component is and how they overlap with one another. The core
eight areas of professional development for virtual trainers are:
• Experience design
• Environment shaping
• Online facilitation
• Facilitator presence
• Technical fluency
• Dynamic engagement
• Agile troubleshooting
• Evaluating impact
Let’s take a closer look at each.
Figure 1-1. Virtual Trainer Capability Model

Experience Design Capability
As a virtual trainer, you may not always be involved in
designing the instruction that underlies the training you
deliver; however, you should be knowledgeable and skilled in
how you design the experience for the learner. Design
determines scope, sequence, strategy, learning activities, skill
practices, and more. Approaching instructional design solely
from your own “design cave” without input from others misses
an opportunity to improve quality. Contrast this with designers
who ask for input from representative learners very early in
the process. When I initiate focus groups or run designs by a
few learners one-on-one in the beginning stages of the design
process, their input has always proved to be immensely
valuable.
Going beyond what we know as traditional instructional
design, there are other important elements to learn about
creating experiences that extend beyond the virtual session.
This capability will challenge you to think differently about
how you currently design while helping you understand that
every learner touchpoint (from A to Z) is part of the learner
experience. For example, creating an experience map to

envision your learners’ overarching journey can be a helpful
way to visualize and identify opportunities for reinforcing and
enhancing participants’ learning experiences.
Environment Shaping Capability
Virtual trainers are also responsible for leading and creating
positive learning climates. Cultivating psychological safety,
inclusivity, personalization, and global cultural competence go
a long way to creating virtual spaces where learners are
comfortable engaging with others. This capability includes
being respectful of all cultures as part of global cultural
competence. For example, in international and cross-cultural
classes, use broader examples from other countries, research
and 
avoid 
offensive 
on-camera 
hand 
gestures 
from
participating cultures, and thoughtfully weigh the best start
times for sessions to accommodate learners.
Developing this capability also helps facilitators be mindful
of the cumulative small things they can do to build
environments that welcome the unique contributions of every
learner. For example, a virtual facilitator who begins a session
acting impatient or frustrated can unintentionally poison the
energy of what could have otherwise been a productive virtual
environment. Energy is contagious, and negative energy
trickles down easily to others. Contrast this with facilitators
who begin a virtual session with enthusiasm and passion. They
affirm participants’ contributions and cultivate a safe space in
which learners are comfortable participating, sharing, and
learning.
Online Facilitation Capability
Virtual facilitators also need to communicate clearly and in a
compelling manner. This includes prompting learners to
participate, posing thoughtful open-ended questions, keeping a
watchful eye on who is contributing and who isn’t, and
checking in with those who have not yet shared. Online
facilitation is an expanded skill set from traditional facilitation.
For example, facilitators need to learn how to verbalize what is
unseen for participants, be flexible with format, and guide

participants to be co-creators of their own learning. Because of
the differences between online facilitation and in-person
facilitation, this capability is critical to developing beyond the
basics.
Facilitator Presence Capability
Another key core business skill in which virtual trainers need
to develop literacy is on-camera competency. This is the
online facilitator’s ability to project themselves professionally
on camera. In addition to framing themselves, adjusting
movement, and lighting themselves well on camera, virtual
trainers must also demonstrate superb verbal communication
skills. They need to express ideas and concepts with concise
language, clarity, expression, and eloquence in a way learners
can logically follow and understand. In addition, they need the
know-how to optimize their own technical equipment to create
the best possible audio quality for learners.
How facilitators leverage their on-camera skills, voice, and
audio equipment all contribute to how they come across
online. I call this facilitator presence. Ultimately, when done
well, it conveys a sense of the facilitator “being there,”
regardless of time and distance. An example of establishing
poor facilitator presence is when a facilitator speaks in a
monotone voice with minimum inflection, uses their device’s
built-in microphone (which makes it sound like they’re in a
cave), and shares a poorly lit camera angle of themselves
looking oddly truncated at the chin. Contrast this with an
effective facilitator, who leverages a variety of vocal
inflections, uses a high-quality external USB microphone,
lights themselves well from the front, and centers themselves
in the frame with a small margin of headroom.
Technical Fluency Capability
Although technology should not be the primary driver of the
learning experience, virtual trainers must possess the
knowledge and skills to strategically use tools to support
learning goals and outcomes. Reaching technical fluency
means you are digitally literate. You have developed your

capability to full competency because you can now effectively
leverage common tools and onscreen interactions, are
comfortable with the ins and outs of platforms, and can
successfully pair apps and other digital learning tools with
training. This capability also includes the all-around know-
how when it comes to the software and hardware needed to
support virtual training. Knowing when to partner with a
producer who is technically fluent and developing a positive
working relationship with them is also a skill.
A facilitator might reveal their technical deficiency by not
knowing when or how to leverage platform tools. For
example, assigning 10 participants into a breakout with six
tasks for them to complete within a five-minute time limit, and
then struggling to successfully divide them into breakouts
demonstrates a lack of technical fluency. In this instance, the
breakouts have too many people, too much to do, and too little
time in which to do it. In contrast, technically fluent
facilitators and producers know the value of creating breakouts
with only three or four participants and a focused challenge,
task, or activity, all while allowing sufficient time for brief
introductions and for groups to complete the activity without
rushing. Proficient facilitators seamlessly know what buttons
to click to successfully divide participants, open and start
breakouts, pop into some to check on group progress, send a
broadcast message to prepare participants to return, and close
breakouts to bring them back for a debrief.
Dynamic Engagement Capability
Virtual trainers can successfully capture learners’ attention
with a variety of strategies. Some strategies are designed to
prevent learners from habituating to certain stimuli or to
prevent participants from disengaging. This capability requires
a wide variety of movement visually and vocally to help
direct, focus, and captivate learners throughout virtual training
programs. An example of poor performance in this capability
is when a facilitator only displays nine static slides to anchor a
90-minute virtual training session. In this example, there is
little visual change, variety, or dynamic momentum to keep

attention, especially if participants are left looking at the same
static slide for 10 minutes.
At its core, virtual training as an online medium is highly
visual and verbal. Think of all the visual content these
technology platforms feature, such as slides, on-camera
participants, digital whiteboards, polls, chat text, and even
some facilitators holding placards when they turn on video.
Movement within these visual pieces should involve frequent
changes or dynamic focusing elements like annotation. Even
cumulatively building elements on a whiteboard can stimulate
dynamic engagement. Because extremes of too much and no
movement at all are both undesirable, there still needs to be a
semblance of balance. One exemplar of this capability is
scaffolding content visually by progressively building slide
content to direct focus and add emphasis and variety. It is one
of the best strategies at our disposal for engaging learners.
Agile Troubleshooting Capability
Because online facilitators frequently work with virtual
technologies, the odds that something technical can or will go
wrong are high. The agile troubleshooting capability helps you
develop the skill, confidence, and expertise to effectively
resolve technical issues like a pro. Agility means you develop
skills that enable you to think and act quickly, as well as adapt
and pivot when needed. Ideally, partnering with a producer
who can manage the technical side for you is extremely
helpful, but facilitators should still be prepared to troubleshoot
as a backup, or in the event you are unable to be paired with a
producer.
Part of this capability also includes preventive action. For
example, a facilitator ideally sends a welcome email to
participants well before class day, encouraging them to test
their connections with the link provided, and inviting them to
log in five to 10 minutes early on class day. Both actions
create space for early troubleshooting and resolution, if
needed. Overall, this capability encompasses skills for
diagnosing, troubleshooting solutions or workarounds, and
recovery from the adrenaline rush when things go wrong.

Recovery is resilience. It’s the ability to move forward
constructively as soon as possible after a glitch, all the while
leading learners to do the same. A poor example of this is a
facilitator who panics and get stuck emotionally in the turmoil
of a technical disruption. As a result, they are unable to think
clearly, which also makes them less likely to find a solution. A
proficient, agile troubleshooter, however, has thought of
solutions to the most common technical issues ahead of time.
Because of their preparation, they know what to try first.
Additionally, agile troubleshooters do their best to maintain a
calm, attentive mindset regardless of what emerges, and they
can pivot to a different activity if needed. They don’t get stuck
lamenting about what could have been, and instead accept
what is. This way, they become more open to opportunities to
course correct. Lastly, they must know their platform inside
and out to be prepared to resolve any surprises.
Evaluating Impact Capability
Virtual professionals, like all providers of learning solutions,
should measure the value of their training programs. This is
how you know whether your investment of time, money, and
resources has met its goal and was worth the effort.
Developing in this capability means identifying what you will
measure and how from the very outset. Ideally, your metrics
begin by aligning with your knowledge and performance
objectives.
An example of poor performance in this capability is the
absence of any evaluation whatsoever. In this situation, you
wouldn’t know the value-add of your program except by
anecdote. If leaders asked whether the program’s goals were
achieved, you wouldn’t be able to answer. Most importantly,
you wouldn’t be able to improve the course without knowing
your baseline. Contrast this with a virtual training professional
who objectively measures and collects data on the
effectiveness of their programs beyond attendance. Because
whether learners attend virtual training does not prove they
have learned anything or can apply the information in their
functional work. To be honest, it only documents that they
logged in. As you develop in this capability, it is important to

identify metrics to track the different levels of evaluation that
are most appropriate to the needs of your organization,
leadership, stakeholders, and learners. And because evaluation
and innovation go together, you also need to be an innovator,
experimenting with the technology for continuous ways to
improve live online learning.
Capabilities by Chapter
Most chapters in this book focus primarily on a key capability.
This is not to say that chapter discussions exclude other
capabilities; however, most chapters align with one. As the
puzzle metaphor of the visual model communicates though, all
eight capabilities are tightly interconnected. As you achieve
competence in all capability areas, you will discover for
yourself their interdependent reliance on one another. Table 1-
1 identifies which capability is the focus of each chapter.
Table 1-1. Primary Capabilities by Chapter
Chapter
Chapter Title
Primary Capability
2
Designing Virtual Learning
Experiences
Experience Design
3
Shaping a Successful Virtual
Learning Environment
Environment Shaping
4
Applying the Secrets of Effective
Online Facilitation
Online Facilitation
5
Developing Your Professional On-
Camera Competence
Facilitator Presence
6
Enhancing Facilitator Presence
Through Audio and Vocal Delivery
Facilitator Presence
7
Leveraging Your Platform’s
Technical Tools
Technical Fluency
8
Following the Dynamic Principle
of Engagement
Dynamic Engagement
9
Troubleshooting and Recovery
Agile Troubleshooting

With Agility
10
Evaluating and Innovating in the
Virtual Space
Evaluating Impact
11
Flipping Virtual Training With
Blended Learning
All
12
Combining On-Site and Online
Learners in Live Mixed Learning
All
101 Professional Tips
To support your skill and knowledge development in the
virtual training capabilities, you will also find a treasure trove
of actionable professional tips scattered throughout this book.
These tips are categorized under each capability and serve as
prescriptive principles you and your teams can apply to help
you design and facilitate successful live online learning. You’ll
find a summary of the pro tips discussed at the end of each
chapter.
Applying the Virtual Trainer Capability Model in
Your Organization
As you continue to produce and facilitate live online learning,
use the Virtual Trainer Capability Model as a professional
development benchmark for you and your virtual training
teams. Use it as a gauge to elevate virtual training standards.
To gain a broader perspective of how professional
development fits into the business, consider examining your
organization’s vision, mission, and strategic goals. From there,
align your training initiatives and professional development
efforts with the higher-level initiatives of the organization.
Virtual trainers should also consider having conversations
with their managers to review the capability model together.
This provides a mutual opportunity to discuss a facilitator’s
areas of strengths as well as opportunities for improvement.
Work with your manager to create a specific development plan
for growing your skills in design or virtual facilitation. You
can attach your development plan to your performance goals

for the year. Write out specific goals to help you adopt the
practical tips most relevant to you.
In addition to the capabilities, you might even identify
which professional tips in the book resonate most with you.
Set target goals for yourself after examining your current skills
to gauge which ones you’d like to work on improving over
time. For example, one of your goals might be to “consistently
apply three specific tips from the on-camera competency
chapter to my upcoming virtual training events over the next
two months.” Once you identify targets, set a timeline for
application, practice, and feedback, and commit to your own
professional 
development. 
Set 
check-ins 
to 
create
accountability and discuss challenges and how things are
progressing. Begin with the capabilities where you have the
most opportunity for improvement, in addition to sharpening
your strengths. The end goal is full proficiency and
competence in each of the eight areas.
Finally, you might also consider sharing the model with
leadership to use as a reference for assessing current skill
levels of your virtual facilitators, and as a hiring rubric for
adding new staff. The model can set a comparison trajectory of
professional development for you or your professional virtual
training team. Allow the model to help you discern the skills
of candidates you’re considering for virtual facilitation and
design positions in your organization. Ask final candidates to
deliver a mini virtual training session online where you can
assess their knowledge and skill in each of the capability areas
during the interview process. This will guarantee that the new
employees you hire are the most qualified candidates to
advance your organization through effective live online
learning.
Summary
Virtual training has clearly exploded in recent years.
Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, the world’s widespread
adoption of this training delivery method was essential to
move a remote workforce forward. As the world continues to
embrace virtual training and hybrid models for virtual

learning, the aim of this book is to help improve quality by
equipping you with the needed skills and knowledge to be a
more advanced designer and facilitator.
In today’s remote work environment, skilled virtual
facilitation is essential for trainers and educators. You may be
skilled as an in-person classroom trainer, yet in the virtual
space you need more specific skills to facilitate online
interactivity, skillfully manage multitasking, be technically
fluent, oversee logistics and troubleshooting, master being on
camera in a professional and powerful way, leverage your
voice, and engage virtual learners.
Because of this necessity, learning experience design and
live online facilitation in today’s world are essential core
business skills. By sharpening your skills and constructing
new knowledge, you are better equipped to meet the needs of
the modern-day hybrid work environment with innovation and
impact. Use the Virtual Trainer Capability Model to
professionally upskill your expertise in these eight key
development areas, so you can take it to the next level!

“At its best, e-learning is as good as the best classroom
learning. And at its worst, it is as bad as the worst classroom
learning. The difference is design … design is the 1,001
decisions, big and small, that affect the outcome.”
—William Horton, author, E-Learning by Design

Designing Virtual Learning
Experiences
When developing her first few virtual training sessions, Emma
spent a lot of planning time writing precise learning
objectives, organizing content, creating supporting graphics,
and coming up with learning activities. But when each session
ended, she realized that something was missing. Participants
were passive, asked few questions, and didn’t really seem to
engage. From a learner’s perspective, the training experiences
were mediocre at best and didn’t seem to have much impact
after they ended. What could Emma do differently with virtual
training design to improve the learning experience?
When you design a virtual training session, how do you
envision participants responding? Are they motivated right
from the start? Are they interacting with others? Are they
practicing challenging tasks related to their work? My
colleagues and I have a list of descriptors we’d like learners to
say and feel about their online experience. These include terms
like practical, relevant, engaging, meaningful, interactive, and
in depth. When learners log out of your online sessions, what
do you want them to feel, think, and say about it? In short,
what kind of learning experience do you want them to have?
Chapter 1 introduced the Virtual Trainer Capability Model
and the eight core capabilities for professionally developing
virtual trainers, learning designers, and instructors of online
professional development and training programs. In this
chapter, we’ll focus on the first capability, experience design.
As virtual trainers, our goal is to approach the craft of
designing instruction as a learning experience. Our design task
is somewhat analogous to what an architect does. Skilled

architects start with a vision of what to build, for whom, and
the purposes it will serve. Then this translates into a design
blueprint for building and delivering a first-rate experience.
We, too, need to invest time and effort to develop impactful
learning designs that will help us deliver exceptional virtual
learning experiences.
Your job title may be instructional designer, e-learning
developer, or learning and development specialist because you
design live online learning programs. Or perhaps you are a
virtual facilitator who also designs the online training
programs you facilitate. Regardless of your formal title, if you
assist with virtual learning design in any way, this chapter will
challenge you to think differently, more holistically, and more
intentionally about learning design. You will become familiar
with learning experience design (LXD) principles and
practices to apply to live online learning. You’ll also gain
insight into how skilled learning experience designers are
learner-centered and how they integrate cognitive, emotional,
social, and behavioral dimensions of learning into impactful
training experiences. And you’ll learn how to apply design
thinking strategies that unleash creative thinking, as well as
ways to enhance the learner’s journey throughout a virtual
training program. All this is aimed at making the virtual
learning 
experience 
more 
engaging, 
meaningful, 
and
impactful.
THE BIG IDEA
Design virtual training as learning experiences
that integrate the cognitive, emotional, social,
and behavioral learning dimensions.
Learning Experience Design (LXD) for Virtual
Training
In your role within learning and development, and as a user of
various products and services, you have likely heard the terms
user experience, customer experience, patient experience,
employee experience, and more recently learner experience.
These concepts reflect a rising importance placed on an end

user’s overall experience with a product or service. This
fundamental shift that centers on the end user when making
design decisions is often the difference in better product
quality, increased sales, greater customer loyalty, better patient
choice, and, for us, improved learning outcomes and learner
satisfaction.
What Is Learning Experience Design?
For me and others, the concept of learning experience design
(LXD) is more than just a surface rebranding of conventional
instructional design practices. Most traditional instructional
design models, which originated during World War II, are not
well matched to today’s digital learning environments. One
helpful way to understand LXD is to think of it as an evolution
of conventional instructional design—like instructional design
2.0. LXD builds on many of the core principles of traditional
instructional design (ID 1.0) but provides a broader and more
modern-day set of tools, strategies, and terms to approach
learning design. Today’s online learning environments are
more technology enabled, more learner-driven, and more
learner-centered. LXD is about rejuvenating and enriching
conventional instructional design practices to achieve learning
and performance goals and meet the needs of modern learners
in today’s digital work environment.
Experience is a key word here. Significant learning
outcomes are a by-product of rich experiences. Einstein has
been quoted as saying “Learning is an experience. Everything
else is just information” (Immersive Learning News 2020).
Authors Sharon Boller and Laura Fletcher (2020) in their
book, Design Thinking for Training and Development,
summarize the role of today’s instructional designers as
follows: “We don’t create learning. Instead, people have an
experience as they learn.” Throughout this book, I will
encourage you to adopt an LXD mindset for virtual training
and leverage the capabilities of evolving technology tools and
new learning spaces.
Influences on LXD

LXD has evolved by adopting practices and principles from
several other disciplines. Building on its instructional design
foundation, it has been heavily influenced by at least three
other professional disciplines that I integrate into our learning
design approach. These include user experience design, design
thinking, and evidence-based practice. First, LXD borrows
heavily from the field of user experience design (UXD). The
term UXD was first coined by cognitive psychologist Donald
Norman in the 1990s when working at Apple. Norman and
others recognized that computer hardware and software
needed to be more human-friendly and user-centered.
UXD has evolved into a broad field of professional practice.
Commonly 
used 
in 
developing 
websites, 
software
applications, and interfaces for computers and other
technology devices, UXD applies human-centered design
principles to improve people’s interactions with technology.
UXD professionals use empirical methods such as user
observation, interviews, evidence-based research, and user
testing and feedback in various branches of psychology to gain
insight into the needs and behaviors of users. This then helps
to create better interactive experiences. UX is to the user what
LX is to the learner. Learning experience design incorporates
many of the practices and strategies of UXD and applies them
to improve the online learner experience.
Another influence that has become integral to both LXD
and UXD is design thinking. Design thinking is a flexible
human-centered, problem-solving approach used in a variety
of disciplines. According to the Interaction Design Foundation
(2021), “The design thinking process is iterative, flexible, and
focused on collaboration between designers and users, with an
emphasis on bringing ideas to life based on how real users
think, feel and behave.” Made popular in the US in the early
1990s by the global design firm IDEO, design thinking has
roots going back to the 1970s and Scandinavian participatory
design approaches. The main emphasis is on designing human-
centered and experienced-centered products and services. It is
as much a mindset as it is a process and set of practices.
Design thinking invites multiple stakeholders, including
users and learners, into the design process. It includes stages

of empathy for learners by defining design challenges and
performance gaps from multiple perspectives, followed by
ideating and brainstorming. Rapidly testing out ideas coupled
with learner feedback and iteration of potential solutions are a
few of its main strategies. The design thinking process is
iterative, collaborative, and almost always results in creative
and impactful new ideas and solutions. Michael Allen’s
Successive Approximation Method (SAM) heavily integrates
design thinking practices (Allen 2012). Boller and Fletcher’s
2020 book, Design Thinking for Training and Development,
provides a framework and principles for adapting design
thinking for training design projects. A full implementation of
design thinking is most effective for generating solutions to
high-stakes instructional challenges. However, to create virtual
training experiences, we can adapt and integrate many design
thinking practices into our learning design process, which we
cover later in this chapter.
A third major influence for LXD can be broadly framed as
evidence-based practice. This concept was first used in the
healthcare industry but has spread to other professional
disciplines including education and training. Compared to
conventional instructional design, LXD places a greater
emphasis on making learning design decisions based on
empirical evidence and learning science research. LXD draws
upon cognitive neuroscience, psychology, social science,
computer-based learning, media and communications, and
other human-centered disciplines. Leaders in this area include
Ruth Clark, Clark Quinn, Will Thalheimer, Julie Dirksen, and
others who study and explain this research for learning design
professionals. Evidence-based practice in LXD also entails
being more empirically grounded. It involves testing out new
design ideas; closely observing learners; collecting data about
learner behaviors, feelings, and reactions; and evaluation as
integral elements throughout the learning design process.
There are other streams of influence that have shaped the
growth of LXD. Worth mentioning are immersive learning
strategies emerging from new technologies. These range from
interactive case scenarios, digital games, and simulations to
virtual 
and 
augmented 
realities. 
They 
emphasize

contextualizing learning; individuals are given challenges,
make decisions, and get feedback all aimed at making learning
more active, relevant, and engaging. Cognitive psychologist
Clark Quinn’s learning experience framework draws on game
design principles supported by cognitive science as a
foundation for increasing meaningfulness and learner
engagement (Quinn 2021). Gamification expert Karl Kapp
also presents compelling evidence to inspire instructional
designers to think more like game designers (Kapp, Blair, and
Mesch 2014). It’s difficult not to use the words “experience”
and “engaging” when describing any of the types of learning
designs mentioned earlier.
LXD is a holistic, learner-centered approach that
incorporates principles and practices from multiple disciplines
to rejuvenate traditional instructional design for modern
learning environments. As a learning experience designer, we
lead with the experience we want learners to have, not the
content we want them to consume. So, how might all this
apply to virtual training and live online learning?
PRO TIP 1
Apply LXD by leading with experience, not
content.
Applying LXD to Virtual Training
To apply LXD in a virtual context, think of it as the sum of a
learner’s interactions with content, people, and technology. It
can begin with the very first email a learner receives after
registering for a virtual training event, all the way to the
completion of any post-session work, follow-up action plans,
and evaluation. According to The Learning Guild’s director of
research, Jane Bozarth (2020), “LXD recognizes that learning
often happens in a context larger than a single course and may
be comprised of many different elements.”
Designing learning experiences in live online training is not
about presenting content with a few learning activities or
delivering mini lectures interspersed with a few polls. LXD is
about experience. Admittedly, it’s difficult to break free from
the entrenched content-centric tendencies reflected in the

design of many training programs. LXD’s more holistic
orientation encompasses all the touchpoints in the learning
process from A to Z. Previously, the learning and development
community did not have a well-articulated language and
framework to implement LXD. To help you apply this to your
virtual training designs, we’ll reference the 4 Dimensions of
Learning model described in the next section. We’ll be
threading the elements of this framework throughout the book.
4 Dimensions of Learning: An LXD Model
In their book Designing the Online Learning Experience,
Simone Conceição and Les Howles (2021) from the
University of Wisconsin identify four constituent elements
underlying the design of engaging and impactful learning
experiences (Figure 2-1). Their framework is based on
research on learner engagement in formal environments
including adult online education and training programs.
Because of the formal structure of most virtual training, I’ve
found designing learning around these four dimensions to be
particularly useful. The four dimensions are cognitive,
emotional, social, and behavioral (Conceição and Howles
2021). The key is to tightly integrate these dimensions into the
design of learning activities, lessons, and other kinds of events
that take place in a virtual instructor-led training (vILT)
environment. Let’s take a look at each dimension and how it
can be integrated into the design.
Figure 2-1. Four Dimensions of Learning

Cognitive Dimension
The cognitive dimension of learning pertains to the mental
processes supporting how individuals acquire, assimilate,
store, and recall knowledge for application. It is the bedrock of
all formal learning where verbal and visual language are used
to convey and shape ideas. One doesn’t need to look much
further than Benjamin Bloom’s (1956) longstanding and still
widely used levels of cognitive learning to get an idea of the
scope of this domain. The cognitive dimension of learning has
received the most attention in education and training as well as
in learning science research. Many professional training
programs focus on learners acquiring and understanding facts,
concepts, principles, procedures, and processes. Acquiring
such knowledge enables individuals to form mental models
that support job-related problem solving, decision making, and
performance.
Learning science research provides numerous principles for
enhancing cognitive learning and how to chunk and present
information. You can apply these principles through
multimedia message design based on cognitive load theory,
which I reference throughout this book (Mayer 2014), and
through practice strategies such as spaced repetition, retrieval
practice, and feedback. Much of what we do in virtual training
on the cognitive level focuses on learning concepts and
information. The ultimate goal of learning is for newly
acquired knowledge to be transferred and applied to the work
context.
In many virtual training sessions, instructors tend to focus
heavily on cognitive learning through presentation segments
supplemented with PowerPoint visual media. To facilitate
cognitive learning, one virtual training strategy includes
pausing to ask questions, which is covered in much greater
depth in chapter 4. This also provides opportunities for
individuals to connect new knowledge to prior knowledge so it
can be solidified in long-term memory. Another strategy for
augmenting cognitive learning in virtual training is to design
mentally challenging learning activities where participants are

asked to recall, apply what they just learned, and solve
hypothetical problems.
One of the most powerful ways to solidify newly acquired
knowledge is to follow up with learning activities in short
periods where individuals reflect on an activity, their decision-
making process, and the results obtained. This is also explored
in greater depth in chapter 4. When ending virtual training
sessions, facilitators can prompt individuals to identify one or
two ways they can apply their new knowledge outside
training.
These strategies and a host of others can be designed to
support the cognitive dimension of learning in virtual training
contexts. From a cognitive learning perspective, all the various
learning activities require learners to draw upon their mental
resources to assimilate the new information. The idea is to
prevent rote and surface-level learning and promote deeper
learning so that learners’ new knowledge is stored in long-
term memory for recall beyond class. In my virtual training
sessions, when I want learners to understand and deeply
process certain concepts and principles, I make sure to include
multimedia and illustrations to clarify and then lead
discussions to digest it further. I also share stories from my
own experience and sometimes use mnemonics to help them
remember the steps we practice.
The cognitive dimension of learning runs deep and
interconnects with the other three dimensions. For example,
it’s hard to imagine learning how to perform complex tasks
(behavioral dimension) and engaging with others in
collaborative problem solving (social dimension) without
cognitive processes coming into play. Focusing on the
cognitive dimension is only part of achieving engaging,
meaningful, and impactful learning experiences. In recent
years, cognitive neuroscience has clarified that the cognitive
dimension is inextricably linked with affect or emotions,
which is where we focus next.
Emotional Dimension

As humans, we are clearly more than just cognitive beings.
Learning science research is now making it abundantly clear
that emotions and cognition are deeply intertwined. As
educational neuroscientist Janet Zadina (2014) states,
“emotions and learning cannot be separate.” The emotional
dimension permeates a person’s entire learning experience,
and skilled facilitators intentionally weave emotional elements
into their teaching from start to finish.
As trainers, what we are mainly focusing on here is learner
motivation, which is deeply rooted in individual emotional
states. Learner motivation drives invested mental effort, which
supports cognitive learning (Paas et al. 2005). Learners need to
be willing to start a learning experience and sustain interest
and effort throughout. If not, learning outcomes will, at best,
be mediocre. Several simple strategies I like to use to increase
learner motivation throughout a live virtual session include
baiting curiosity and introducing challenges, problems, and
even puzzling situations to solve. I especially like to assign
these as breakout activities for small groups.
Beginning training by stating a dry list of objectives can
sometimes do extraordinarily little to stimulate motivation,
especially in a virtual setting when participants might be
looking for any excuse to check text messages or email.
Instead, you can reframe those designer-centered objectives
into more interesting learner-centered statements highlighting
how participants will benefit from the live online session.
Keep your original objectives to drive your design but modify
them into more motivating statements when you share them
with learners. I sometimes rephrase my objectives into
questions to which participants would likely want the answers.
Ideally, this would stimulate their curiosity and motivation, so
they think, “Yeah, I want to learn that” or “I need to know how
to do that.”
PRO TIP 2
Use traditional learning objectives to drive design,
but reframe the objectives shared with learners to
be more motivational for them.

It is also important to recognize that both positive and
negative emotions contribute to performance outcomes and a
learner’s overall experience. We all know that enjoyable
learning activities can make learners more engaged and
motivated. However, it’s easy to forget that challenging
learning activities with episodes of confusion and struggle—if
managed well by a facilitator—can potentially yield some of
the deepest and most memorable learning outcomes (D’Mello
et al. 2014). Think back to when you have heard a learner who
was initially struggling then exclaim “Aha! I got it!” You can
almost hear the pride in their voice, and you feel the positivity
of their emotions because of this accomplishment. This then
can fuel more motivation.
In my designs for virtual training, I try to incorporate
emotional and motivational elements by reminding learners
they can do it and that I believe in them. I prepare them by
sharing right before an assignment that a task may be
challenging, and our producer and I will be right there to
support them. For example, when I train novice trainers
virtually on how to write learning objectives, I always warn
them that it’s hard thinking work but they can do it. After I
demonstrate how to do it, writing examples (both legitimate
and funny) on a digital whiteboard, I have learners practice in
small breakout groups and then write some independently.
Sometimes they tell me later it was “hard thinking work” but
they got it with plenty of practice and feedback! I also try to
explain the rationale for a learning activity before we do it to
help trigger motivation.
Virtual trainers also have additional emotional concerns for
their learners. Because virtual environments are technology
mediated, learners may be confronted with user interfaces and
tools that are not user-friendly. Usability issues can be
frustrating for learners. The virtual facilitator must anticipate
these types of negative technology interactions, which can
sour any learning experience. For example, in my sessions if
learners are new to a platform, experience limited bandwidth,
or have connection issues, I do my best to reframe whatever is
happening with a “cup half-full” mindset instead of a “half-
empty” one. Conducting tech checks beforehand and

providing ways for them to acclimate to the environment can
help alleviate these too. (We discuss preventive measures and
how to troubleshoot to avoid souring learning experiences in
greater depth in chapter 9.) When I teach virtual classes for
universities, I request learners log into the course management
system or LMS a week before to acclimate so they can feel
more comfortable in the class environment. All this helps to
support a positive emotional learning experience.
As part of the learning design process, it is the trainer’s
responsibility to have a mapped-out plan that incorporates
various kinds of motivational strategies for the flow of
instructional events. Learners’ emotional and motivational
states are often difficult to discern in virtual environments. But
as we move into the next two dimensions of learning, we can
often get a better read of the learning experience in terms of
how learners socially interact and what they are doing.
Social Dimension
A virtual training learning experience should be interspersed
with social interactions. The social dimension involves two
main types of interactions: learner-to-instructor and learner-to-
learner (Moore 2013). Live virtual sessions where participants
can hear and see each other fosters a sense of heightened
social presence. The virtual instructor capitalizes on this by
conveying enthusiasm for the topic through voice and physical
gestures, by providing immediate constructive feedback, and
by creating a personable, warm, caring climate of
psychological safety, which we’ll explore more in chapter 3.
These live interactions and a sense of social presence
influence the cognitive and emotional dimensions of learning.
A person’s level of motivation and mental effort can be
enhanced due to the presence of others who are also involved
in the same task. A good analogy is the energy and effort boost
that often occur when exercising alongside others at a fitness
club. On the learner and student side, “Multiple studies
published in the Harvard Business Review, Science, Nature,
and Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences have
found that students learn best in active, social learning

environments” (Bersin 2020). According to 2,000 learners
surveyed in LinkedIn’s 2020 Workplace Learning Report,
approximately half of millennials and boomers surveyed, and
more than half of Gen X and Gen Z learners who participated,
feel more motivated to learn in social environments. “Learners
across all generations also want to learn with their colleagues
to exchange ideas, share insights, and ask questions” (Van
Nuys 2020).
So, live online learning is and should be a social experience.
But the challenge with designing these learning experiences is
creating engaging learning activities that promote participation
and dialogue. The facilitator’s task in designing such activities
is to encourage individuals to share their experience and
knowledge, ask questions without feeling embarrassed, and
welcome dialogue. At the same time, conversations need to
stay on target and focused on learning goals. These productive
interactions occur by making space for learners to collaborate
and learn from one another, such as placing them in breakouts
to solve problems and complete tasks. In my training sessions
on how to facilitate virtually, I give learners a hypothetical
scenario where they experience a major technology glitch, and
they must discuss as a team how they would address it
productively.
Part of being learner-centered in a virtual space also
involves sensitivity to learner differences. For example,
introverted individuals may not contribute as much within a
group learning situation and because of this should not feel
forced to participate. I let my learners know that if they prefer
to work independently on some assignments to let me know
privately through chat, and I am happy to place them in an
independent breakout room or ask that they remain muted in
the main room. Some introverts find they learn the material
better this way.
Another aspect of social learning involves learners
observing experts performing a complex procedure or task and
being able to engage with these experts. For example, if
managers need to learn how to approve or decline staff
requests to take courses in the LMS, you may bring in an LMS

administrator to model it for them and field their questions so
they can interact directly with the expert.
A skilled virtual trainer as a learning designer needs to take
all these social learning factors into consideration. The trick is
discerning when, what kind, and how much social interaction
will add the most value to the learner experience. And, of
course, the interaction always needs to support the learning
goals. Just as emotional and motivational elements must be
strategically and intentionally interspersed throughout a virtual
training session, so must social interactions be carefully
planned, designed, and implemented by virtual facilitators.
It’s also important not to force social interactions into the
virtual training session without a clear instructional rationale.
Social interaction can be a time killer if not managed well.
There are many contextual factors at play here, such as the
type of content, learning objectives, timeframe, number of
learners, platform constraints, and learner characteristics. For
example, topics that have a lot of ambiguity might require
more discussion as opposed to highly defined tasks and
technical content. The trick is getting the right balance
depending on the training context.
It’s quite easy to see the crossover value of social
interactions with the cognitive and emotional dimensions. In
sum, the social dimension can play a significant supportive
role. As some people might argue, all learning is social.
Next let’s explore the final learning dimension for virtual
training, behavioral.
Behavioral Dimension
As many L&D professionals likely agree, much of our training
includes too much telling and not enough doing. This tendency
is often accentuated in the live online training context where
everyone is connected remotely. It’s important to reiterate,
however, that although LXD emphasizes being learner-
centered, it is equally centered on improving performance and
acquiring job-related knowledge. We need to also view the
behavioral dimension of learning as encompassing more than
performing psychomotor operations. Just as behavioral and

performance objectives are not all about physical skills, we
use the concept of behavior here in a broad sense where there
is considerable crossover with the other three dimensions. This
is because learner behavior is shaped by how one thinks
(cognitive), how one feels (emotional), and by what one hears
and sees from others (social).
The behavioral dimension of learning involves action,
practice, application, and performance. It’s often associated
with active learning, a key ingredient for creating engaging
and impactful learning experiences. In many of my virtual
training sessions, I try to include a variety of what e-learning
expert William Horton (2012) refers to as “do type learning
activities.” Learners can work alone or in small groups for
these activities. In this way, they can try out and practice
applying what they’re learning on the cognitive level. They do
this through decision-making scenarios, practice exercises
with feedback, role plays, mini games, and other kinds of
active learning exercises linked to performance goals. For
example, in breakouts you might include skill practices with
role plays where learners practice giving constructive
feedback, so they are better equipped to do so on the job. A
good design strategy recommended by Clark Quinn (2021) to
prioritize the behavioral dimension of learning is to use a
backward design approach. The design sequence begins first
by establishing clear performance objectives. The next step is
to design practice-oriented learning activities based on the
objectives. Focus on supporting content comes later. These
“do type” practice activities can also be used as informal
assessments to evaluate how learners are translating new
knowledge into action. Too often the tendency with virtual
training is to convey content during a virtual learning session.
When this happens, the “do type” activities take a backstage
when they warrant more attention.
The emotional-motivational connection can sometimes be
subtle but is nonetheless a powerful driver behind the
behavioral dimension. David Merrill’s First Principles and
John Keller’s ARCS model (attention, relevance, confidence,
and satisfaction) remind us that practice and doing activities
play a dual role in learning (Merrill 2017; Keller 2009). Not

only can learners reinforce competencies through practice, but
they can also become motivated to learn and practice more
when they experience success accomplishing even small tasks
during training. This is also where learning design should
build in buffers of time for facilitators to provide guided
feedback and reflection following key activities. In this way,
the social and cognitive dimensions work synergistically along
with the behavioral dimension to promote deeper and more
memorable learning experiences.
Finally, the behavioral dimension also encompasses learners
interacting with the functions, features, and tools in virtual
training platforms. Users contributing in meaningful ways on
whiteboards, posting chat responses, completing independent
assignments, giving virtual presentations, or role playing in
breakouts are all examples of doing.
Integrating All Four Dimensions
In their book Designing the Online Learning Experience,
Conceição and Howles (2021) state that “learning experience
design focuses on the structure and psychodynamics of
individual and group experiences that take place in the context
of a particular learning environment.” For us, this context is a
virtual class environment where the psychodynamics play out
with learner interactions among facilitators and learning
colleagues. Structuring virtual learning experiences means
synergistically interweaving the four dimensions. This is
where some of the biggest learning design challenges can
occur.
There is no single formula for integrating the four
dimensions because each learning situation is different, and
the emphasis given to a particular learning dimension can vary
depending on the instructional context. A learning designer
must therefore take into consideration at least three major
factors:
• The type of learning objectives (performance skill or
knowledge)
• The nature of the content (well-defined or ill-defined)

• Learner characteristics (motivation and prior knowledge)
For example, in virtual training sessions for developing
technical skills or standard procedures, the learning goals and
content often involve concepts and behaviors that are well-
defined with little ambiguity. This is often best taught through
expert demonstrations, Q&A, and practice exercises. In this
context, the behavioral and cognitive dimension should be
weighted more heavily in learning design with less prominent
social interaction.
If, however, a training situation involves learners who lack
motivation for the learning content, the learning design should
incorporate more motivational and emotional elements
throughout the session, beginning the moment individuals
enter the virtual learning space and preferably even before. If
the learning goals focus on complex decision-making skills or
certain kinds of people business skills, social interactions and
group problem solving activities can considerably enrich the
learning experience.
Including elements of all four dimensions into training
design is almost always a good idea and makes for more well-
rounded and engaging learning experiences. However, the
relative weight you award to each will depend on the
circumstances. Although the four dimensions of learning may
appear simple, it is the intentional and balanced integration of
them into your virtual training where the LXD skill lies.
PRO TIP 3
Integrate the four learning dimensions throughout
the virtual learning experiences you design.
Learner and Task-Centered Design
As we practice using the experience design capability, it’s
important to recognize it’s not just about pleasing learners.
The bottom line of LXD must also be about improving
workplace performance. Yet we strive to do this in a way that
is meaningful and satisfying for learners, which is also a
measurement of how we evaluate the training, as discussed
further in chapter 10. So, as we practice LXD, we need to

strike a balance between learner and task centeredness. Let’s
start by focusing on the learner-centered aspect, what it means,
and how to apply it to your designs.
Learner-Centered Empathic Design
A foundational principle of LXD, based on design thinking, is
empathy for the learner. Empathy is often a misconstrued
concept and can be interpreted in different ways. When
applied to live online learning, empathy is approaching the
design and delivery of a live online learning experience from a
virtual learner’s perspective. What this means in essence is
envisioning how a learner might think, feel, socially interact,
and behave throughout their live online journey. This concept
of empathy applies to all LXD work and can be referred to as
empathic design (Conceição and Howles 2021).
Holding this learner perspective throughout the design
process naturally leads to better learning experiences. This is
because it establishes a closer alignment with learners for
learning designers and facilitators. However, one of the
biggest barriers to doing this is a pervasive and well-known
psychological tendency called the “false consensus effect”
(Ross, Greene, and House 1977). This is where we tend to
project our beliefs, behaviors, and preferences onto other
people, assuming they will respond the way we do. One of the
most-often heard mantras in the field of user experience design
when developing software applications is “You are not the
user!” For LXD professionals, this translates to: “You are not
the learner!” Acknowledging one’s own vulnerability to the
false consensus bias and a tendency to confidently assume you
know what learners need and how they should be trained is the
first step to practicing empathic learning design.
When we fully apply learner-centered empathic design, we
realize learning experiences are more than just what happens
in a live online class. The experience begins before learners
even log into a virtual course and extends after learners exit
the platform. For example, a learner’s initial impression of
your virtual training might occur via a pre-session
communication from their LMS notifying them they are

registered for a virtual class. This leads us to ask ourselves,
what might it be like to be on the receiving end of this
message? Does the communication convey emotional
excitement for the course, or does it feel sterile and distant?
Does the message help establish a social connection with
learners? Is it personable? In all of this, we want to place
ourselves in the shoes of the virtual learner and incorporate
strategies from the cognitive, emotional, social, and behavioral
dimensions of learning.
Practicing empathy in a live class was best illustrated by
one of the most talented math teachers I’ve had the privilege
of meeting. He had the remarkable ability to temporarily set
aside what he knew about solving difficult mathematics
problems, and instead look at them from a learner’s
perspective, posing the same kinds of questions they might be
asking. He would enact and articulate their confusion,
struggle, and misconceptions and guide them to a deeper
understanding. As you can imagine, he was a remarkable
teacher. This is a good example of empathy that skilled
facilitators can put into practice. You begin where your
learners are.
When you work with subject matter experts (SMEs) to
design learning, it’s also important to keep in mind that their
understanding of a topic or skill is often skewed toward
content and performance accuracy, and not as much on the
learner and learning experience. Studies by Richard Clark
have revealed that when teaching complex tasks, experts tend
to omit well over 50 percent of necessary information that
would be helpful to novice learners (Clark and Elen 2006).
This is because a majority of experts’ skill has become
automated and is not as easily accessible to conscious
awareness. Also, accomplished experts, when designing and
delivering instruction, tend to focus more on describing their
actions rather than the thought process underlying what they
are doing. This is key. Learners need to also understand how
an expert is thinking about the problem. So, when working
with SMEs, it’s important to continue emphasizing the learner
perspective when designing instruction. Encourage SMEs to
be more explicit about their underlying thought processes and

help them uncover the seemingly simple but essential
assumptions they unknowingly take for granted. This helps
facilitate empathic design.
As virtual facilitators, we can look for opportunities to
practice developing empathy in various aspects of our lives.
For example, when I acted in stage plays, I always tried to find
at least one opportunity during a rehearsal before opening
night to sit in a seat in the last row of the auditorium. I
imagined the perspective of a potential audience member as I
sat in this seat. I then remembered that view from the last row
when I was on stage. In my mind’s eye, I still recalled what it
looked and felt like. I discovered this to be transformative
because I noticed a shift inside that helped me to fill space on
stage more fully. For example, I was more conscious of
“cheating toward the audience” (turning my face toward the
audience) when I delivered my lines, as well as gesturing
bigger so they could be more easily seen from far away.
Empathic design strategies expand our perspectives in ways
we may not have previously realized. This is how we keep
learners’ needs and desires in the foreground. When we do
this, we prioritize the learner’s perspective over our own
design ideas, decisions, and preferences. The result is an
enhanced and more effective learning solution. This is the
empathic mindset of the learning experience designer and
facilitator.
PRO TIP 4
Be empathic by prioritizing your learners’
perspective over your own design ideas,
decisions, and preferences.
Task-Centered Design Thinking
Empathy also goes along with workplace performance
improvement. Many training programs place an emphasis on
knowing about a topic or discipline, as opposed to knowing
how to perform it or apply knowledge. Deliberately integrating
the behavior dimension into training attempts to bridge what
Pfeffer and Sutton (2000) describe in the title of their book as
The Knowing-Doing Gap. The tendency of training programs

to overemphasize content and inert knowledge has been one of
the greatest laments in the field of learning design as reflected
in the eLearning Manifesto (Allen et al. 2014). In virtual
training, we want to shift from a content- and instructor-
centered focus 
to a performance- and task-centered
perspective. This involves helping learners transfer the
knowledge they’ve acquired at the cognitive level and apply it
in real-world contexts such as making decisions, performing
tasks, and having an impact on the organization.
As we have established, LXD incorporates design thinking,
a holistic and human-centered way to solve problems. As we
examine most training programs, their purpose often focuses
on solving workplace performance problems and challenges.
Because of this, LXD also must have a greater impact on
individual workplace performance as employees upskill,
reskill, and practice applying job-related tasks. This, of course,
places a greater emphasis on the behavioral dimension of
learning when designing virtual training.
After the green light has been given to proceed with a
training solution, and virtual training has been selected as the
appropriate delivery approach, here are some of the design
thinking strategies I include in my initial exploratory phase of
learning design:
• I rewrite learning objectives as performance objectives
(what learners need to do). This serves as a basis for
identifying what the focus of each learning activity should
be. I then meet with stakeholders to collect their input on
objectives and get final approval.
• I try to focus on the design of practice activities associated
with a few of the most important learning objectives
before thinking about content design. I create a rough
outline or sketch for a practice activity and how it might
flow. I regard these initial ideas as starting points that are
OK to throw away. The first idea, no matter how good it
might seem, is seldom the best idea.
• Next, I spend a little time validating some of the initial
assumptions made by stakeholders and SMEs regarding
learner needs and learning outcomes. I get out of my

designer cave and hold video calls or brief informal
conversations with people. If possible, I talk first with a
few prospective learners and a stakeholder or two to get
their reactions to the direction.
• If I’m working with a colleague or SME, I share this
information with them and begin ideation and very rapid
prototype outline sketches of a few of the learning
practice activities. I’m not thinking about content at this
point, but the performance tasks I want to simulate in each
learning activity. The content comes later and gets
wrapped around them.
This task-centered aspect of creating virtual training
programs is an iterative process. It involves clarifying
performance problems, ideating creative solutions, testing
instructional strategies, and receiving feedback. We need to
strike the right balance between learner engagement,
meaningfulness, and performance impact. Sharon Boller and
Laura Fletcher (2020) refer to this as hitting the sweet spot
when incorporating design thinking into their training
approach. In a work context, virtual training and learning have
a bottom line. Therefore, prioritize the needs of stakeholders
and learners.
Strategies for Applying LXD to Virtual Training
Let’s build on what we’ve learned about LXD thus far by
looking at several core strategies for designing virtual training.
You’ll find that these strategies can be applied broadly in
almost any training design context, but our focus naturally is
to enhance the learner experience in live virtual training
environments.
Include Learners and Stakeholders in the
Design Process
The instructional design for many training programs usually
involves input from a limited number of individuals. In most
organizations, an instructor or learning designer works with a
SME to craft the design. As they create a training program,
they make dozens of assumptions and decisions about what

information learners need, how they will use it in their work
context, what kinds of learning activities to include, and how
they think learners will respond to the various design elements
of the training. Input and ideas from other stakeholders,
particularly those destined to be recipients of the instruction,
are often seen as unnecessary and time consuming, especially
when training is converted from in-person to virtual.
However, skilled designers adopt principles of design
thinking in developing products, services, and professional
development 
programs, 
and 
recognize 
the 
value 
of
collaboration and feedback starting early in the design process.
Many use a strategy often referred to as “participatory design,”
which had been used successfully for decades in northern
Europe before design thinking became popularized in the mid-
1990s (DiSalvo et al. 2017). This design strategy, with its
emphasis on user centeredness, has become a core practice in
design thinking and UXD. It involves obtaining ideas and
feedback from various stakeholders in making design
decisions. Its most central principle is that the users or
recipients of any product or service should have input into the
design from the very beginning. This strategy is most useful
for larger high-stakes training projects where live virtual
training sessions may be part of a blend of instructional
components such as coaching, on-demand microlearning
modules, and performance support. However, it can also be
useful in designing performance-focused learning activities
that are part of live virtual or traditional in-person training
sessions.
For example, one of my colleagues once worked for a major
corporation as a program designer for a traditional classroom-
based leadership development course with some online
components. His colleagues offered conflicting opinions about
what instructional methods to use in designing this course, as
well as conflicting assumptions regarding target learner
characteristics, needs, and learning preferences. Deciding to
hear directly from learners themselves, he invited about 10
managers who were to be candidates to take the course to a
one-hour lunch where he provided complimentary pizza and
beverages. During this informal meeting, he shared the course

goals, assumptions he and other training colleagues had about
the prospective participants, and some initial course design
ideas. The insights and design ideas obtained from participants
were so fruitful, they significantly changed the trajectory of
the initial course design. Furthermore, session participants
expressed gratitude for being asked to provide input and ideas
for a course they and their colleagues would likely be required
to attend. In the end, that leadership training course became
the most highly praised and most requested offering within all
the company’s management development curriculum.
From a conventional instructional design perspective,
actively soliciting learner feedback about design ideas may be
viewed as a weakness professionally. In the last example, the
course designer’s manager, after hearing about the ideation
session with prospective learners, light-heartedly exclaimed
“That’s cheating!” However, for myself and others who have
used participatory design, we have observed that some of our
best learning design ideas have come from collaboration with
learners as well as other colleagues. Most individuals
frequently express gratitude for being consulted and enjoy
participating in the learning design process. Although some
instructors and designers may see it as “cheating” or
unnecessary, this LXD strategy usually improves the learning
experience and also does not require a lot of time.
For designers of live virtual training and other instructional
programs, this LXD strategy helps you adopt a more open,
collaborative design mindset. The trick is to use participatory
design in an efficient way that involves the least amount of
time for all stakeholders involved, yet yields the most useful
input. Incorporating collaboration into learning design can be
done through brief informal conversations with stakeholders
where you share initial design plans and challenges and invite
ideas and feedback. Asking good questions and listening is
key. Arranging one-on-one informal conversations or small
group meetings, either face-to-face or via web conferencing,
works best to avoid consensus bias. A 20-minute conversation
with a single individual or an hour-long small group session is
often adequate depending on the complexity of the training
project and the number of key stakeholders who are involved.

Feedforward
This strategy is a natural extension of including learners in
design decisions. As you assemble your content and learning
activities for a virtual training program, open your door to
collaboration. It is critical you start these conversations as
early as possible. Any design feedback you receive from
others after a virtual training program has been nearly
finalized or after implementation comes too late. People rarely
want to go back and perform major surgery on something that
has already been developed, even if the initial assumptions and
design ideas were off base. Gathering feedforward from
stakeholders at the conceptualization phase prevents this from
happening. For example, when I was just beginning to think
about creating a new virtual training program for clients, I ran
the early concept of my vision for this course by three
colleagues in the field. I met with each of them separately to
get their input and reactions. At this early stage, I wasn’t as
invested as I otherwise might have been in my own ideas.
They confirmed the concept and even fine-tuned and expanded
my initial vision.
I have never regretted investing the time to have
conversations with target users, colleagues, managers,
stakeholders, or the time spent conducting short user
interviews or doing dry run walk-throughs of virtual sessions
with a few colleagues. I always learn many things from them
to make them better, and they are always things I didn’t see
myself or previously overlooked.
It’s true, the effort to understand your virtual learners and
listen to them may take a bit more time, especially on the front
end. Just remember that participatory and design thinking
strategies may go slower initially so you can go faster later,
and the quality of your final virtual training designs will be
better because of it.
PRO TIP 5
Include target virtual learners in the early design
process to solicit their feedback and gain their
perspective on course design.

Develop Learner Personas
The conventional ADDIE instructional design process
typically includes a target audience analysis. Most of the time,
if performed at all, this analysis is done rapidly, focusing on
the demographics and surface level characteristics of learners.
The mental picture designers have of their learners often lacks
depth and can be distorted by the designer’s own self-
projections and biases. This is because we tend to assume our
virtual learners are like us, falling prey to the false consensus
effect mentioned earlier. Furthermore, when we create
disembodied lists of learner characteristics and needs,
designers can lose a sense of real people and how they think,
feel, socially interact, and behave in a work context. Those
involved in making learning design decisions need to be on the
same page and keep a similar mental image of their learners in
the forefront of their minds. One LXD technique adapted from
design thinking that helps in developing a shared vision of
target learners is creating learner personas.
Personas are fictional character profiles who are given first
names and attributes that reflect a major segment of the actual
learners participating in your virtual training program. These
personas should be based on your interviews, conversations,
and interactions with them, along with any information
provided by their supervisors and managers who are familiar
with target learners. Creating two or three personas can
provide an adequate composite representation of a target
learner group for design purposes. You can even use animated
or cartoon-like representations of your personas and describe
their backgrounds, what motivates them, what turns them off,
and how much prior knowledge they have about the training
topic. This human-centered and creative approach to
portraying your target virtual learners as real people can be
invaluable. As you plan and design a training session, you now
have a mental picture of, for example, Karra, Meredith, and
Travis in the forefront of your mind. As you design, you think
about how they might react to what you envision happening in
your live online class—what they might think, feel, say, and
do. Personas are especially helpful when working with SMEs
or a design team. Continually referencing personas as real

people reminds everyone to think beyond their own personal
learning design preferences and adopt a more empathic
learner-centered frame of reference instead.
When I designed an online virtual training program for new
hires, I interviewed three separate new employees in the
organization who had only been there a few weeks. I asked
probing questions related to the topic I would be training for
new hires. I quickly constructed two personas named Hank
and Lindsey to share with my co-designer. Not only did this
make the design process more fun, but we were better able to
pattern the design of the virtual sessions around authentic
perceptions and real new-hire questions. Persona character
sketches don’t have to be elaborate or detailed to remind
yourself of who your real learners are. Figure 2-2 shows
simple persona example from my design process.
Figure 2-2. Persona Example
Recall the four dimensions of learning as you create your
personas. Imagine their thoughts, feelings, and behavioral
tendencies, and how they might engage socially and
participate in virtual collaborative group activities. Experiment
with this for the design of your next virtual training class. The
best designers in any field always have a clear mental picture
of the people for whom they are creating a product, service, or
learning experience. As I have discovered, taking the time to
construct a few simple personas to refer to while designing
virtual training sessions has not only been fun, but has helped
shift my own and my colleagues’ instructional design thinking
to be more learner centered. Please note that creating personas

may not always be necessary for small, lower stakes, one-off
virtual training sessions. But when working with colleagues
where live virtual sessions might be a part of a much larger or
highly visible training initiative, having a few personas to
share with design colleagues can help everyone become more
unified and learner-task centered in making design decisions.
PRO TIP 6
Create fictional virtual learner personas to guide
your designs for larger-scale virtual training
programs.
Map the Learner Experience
Another design thinking tool increasingly used by learning
experience designers in developing online and blended courses
is called experience mapping, sometimes also referred to as
journey mapping. The purpose of an experience map is to
provide a more holistic “big picture” sense of the experience
from a learner’s point of view. It is often used in conjunction
with learner personas to help designers move beyond an
instructor- or content-centered bias to a more learner-centered
design mindset. An experience map traces learner interactions
and the major touch points, instructional events, and moments
that matter most to learners as they progress through an entire
learning experience from start to finish. In practicing LXD,
Jane Bozarth (2020) sums it up by saying that applying such
strategies “involves creating and working from user personas
rather than demographics and mapping out the journeys
learners will take as they move to proficiency.” A learner
experience map is part of empathic design. Like personas, you
have flexibility in how you structure experience maps and the
amount of detail needed for your learning context.
An experience map can take the form of a sequential list, a
flow diagram, a table, or even a storyboard. It identifies and
briefly describes the major phases and key interactions
learners may have with content, learning activities, people,
software tools, and other digital artifacts in the planned
learning design. Based on personas, you take note of what a
virtual learner might be thinking, feeling, and doing at various

key junctures throughout the learning experience. The map is
typically organized around major structural components and
instructor–learner touch points of the live session. This can
include pre-session announcements, prework, and logging into
the virtual environment. It then progresses into learner
interactions within the virtual session including introductions,
discussions, 
breakout 
activities, 
instructor 
presentation
segments, reflection exercises, and scenario-based challenges,
all the way to the session close and any post-work or follow-
up activities. The template example in Table 2-1 illustrates one
way an experience may be constructed.
Table 2-1. Experience Map Example
For example, in one of my online virtual events, the first
touch point in my learning experience map consisted of an
email with a link to a brief facilitator welcome video. The
video addressed the cognitive and emotional dimensions of the

learning experience, emphasizing how the class could benefit
participants, and included motivational elements to get them
excited and interested. A few days prior to the session,
learners received another email with logistic and technical
reminders and a link to a brief article related to the topic. The
map continues, documenting each touch point.
There are several benefits to mapping out the learner’s
journey. First, you can begin to anticipate the types of
questions learners might have and notice gaps and design
changes that may need to be addressed. Second, you can also
share the map with a colleague or even a prospective learner to
walk through the experience and get feedback and ideas for
tweaking it. Third, the experience map can also help you
identify where and how you are interweaving the four learning
dimensions throughout the entire virtual learning experience.
Are there enough practice activities to cover all the objectives?
Are social interactions included at the right times to reinforce
cognitive learning? Finally, it’s important to keep in mind that
this is not a content outline or list of instructor actions. Rather,
it’s all about the learner and their anticipated journey through
the learning experience. You can think of it almost like a
scenario or story that includes a series of interconnected
episodes comprising a learning journey that spotlights the
learner.
PRO TIP 7
Create an experience map to envision your
participants’ virtual learning journey from start to
finish.
Leverage the Peak-End Rule to End on a High
Note
Earlier in this chapter, we discussed beginning a virtual
training session in an emotionally motivating way. We also
discussed how the four learning dimensions can be interwoven
throughout an entire virtual session. Now we ask, how should
a virtual learning experience end? Can we do this in a way that
leaves learners feeling more positive and satisfied about their
learning experience? This is where the peak-end rule comes

into play. The peak-end rule refers to a cognitive bias that was
first revealed by Daniel Kahneman and Barbara Frederickson
and has been applied widely to studying how individuals
mentally process and recall all kinds of life experiences,
including learning experiences (Kahneman et al. 1993; Finn
2010). Keep in mind that all learning experiences are highly
subjective. When individuals recall and evaluate a learning
experience, what happens toward the end of the experience is
often remembered and weighted more heavily. Therefore, it is
important for trainers to end their virtual training sessions on a
high note.
The other aspect of this principle relies on the fact that when
individuals reflect on and evaluate a learning experience, they
tend to focus on the most intense emotional moments, which
are referred to as peaks. Their evaluation of an entire learning
experience can become colored, either positively or negatively,
around these peak moments that matter to them regardless of
how minor they may seem to a designer and facilitator. So, it
pays to spend time discussing what is most important for them.
Also, when constructing an experience map for your training
sessions, it is a good idea to identify and anticipate critical
points where potential bumps in the road might occur and
where learners may experience a heightened sense of
accomplishment and pleasure. Build into your learning design
plan periods where learners reflect on significant learning
moments to give them prominence in memory. On the flip
side, anticipate and plan for how to respond to and manage
potential learner frustrations and negative experiences.
In my virtual training sessions, I try to apply this principle
in several different ways. First, my lesson designs typically
include a variety of brief explanatory sections, group
discussion, decision-based scenarios, practice exercises, and
breakout activities. Following significant learning moments,
we pause to reflect and discuss how everyone might apply
what they have learned to their jobs. I also have backup plans
for critical junctures where technology glitches might occur.
Often, I conclude a session with a fun, interactive review game
or other kind of activity that helps reinforce the most
important content from the class.

It is important not to rush these types of activities. Give
participants the time and space they need to do the deep
thinking. I also let them know I will be silent while they do
this reflective work. In other sessions, I include a whiteboard
exercise as a final activity, where I give time to reflect and
complete action plans first. Before learners start writing their
action plans, I prepare them by letting them know I will ask
everyone to share a takeaway from class that they will apply
right away. After the action plans are complete, I ask them to
share this application idea on the virtual whiteboard. This
gives the session a strong close and motivates learners for any
subsequent training.
PRO TIP 8
Apply the peak-end rule by triggering learners’
memories of what has mattered most to them in
the learning experience.
Making the Shift From Designing Instruction to
Designing Learning Experiences
If our goal is to create engaging, meaningful, and impactful
learning experiences for live virtual training, we may need to
make some fundamental shifts in how we think about and
approach learning design. This involves both breaking from
and upgrading many conventional instructional practices,
which necessitates rethinking old mental models of how
learning and instruction take place in synchronous learning
environments infused with new technology affordances.
It is all too easy to approach the virtual training
environment like a conventional classroom and try to design
learning experiences that conform to a closed classroom
model. Seasoned online facilitators are very aware that what
works well in-person does not always translate to best virtual
training practice. As virtual training expert Jennifer Hofmann
(2004) explains, “The most common error for newcomers to
the synchronous training arena is assuming that the same rules
that apply in a traditional classroom apply in a synchronous
classroom.”
PRO TIP 9

Revamp your paradigm of a traditional four-walled
classroom to an open, shared virtual learning
space instead.
With new digital tools in virtual learning spaces, we move
away from the traditional, conceptual model of a four-walled
classroom. For example, facilitators can leverage polling tools,
extend the voice of learners through chat boards, and provide
multiple shared whiteboards with annotation tools for all
participants. We can also include live experts from anywhere
in the world to join our classes. In chapter 11, we talk more
about adopting a blended approach where we can selectively
combine and mix live virtual learning with other asynchronous
components to add the greatest value. In short, virtual training
technologies create new spaces for learning that enable new
kinds of interactions and learning experiences.
Summary
As we apply LXD to virtual training, we expand and
rejuvenate our conventional notions of traditional instructional
design. Although the core concepts and practices used by
many instructional designers and trainers may include LXD
elements, our approach to LXD gives us a language and
broader set of learning design strategies that are more holistic
and learner-task centered.
The four learning dimensions framework serves as a
foundation for designing learning experiences that skillfully
integrate the cognitive, emotional. How we blend these
elements can vary depending on the instructional context
shaped by learning goals, type of content, and learner
characteristics as well as the affordances of technology tools
available within the virtual class environment. These elements
work together to make learning experiences more engaging,
meaningful, and impactful.
In LXD, we borrow practices from other fields, such as
design thinking and user experience design (UXD), and
incorporate evidence-based practices drawing from learning
science research and our own data to make design decisions.
LXD is more inclusive and people-centered, always keeping

the learners’ perspectives in the foreground and initiating
collaboration with colleagues and learners throughout the
design process. Learners can participate in the learning design
process, providing feedforward and feedback as well as
sharing ideas through brief interviews and conversations. With
LXD, we learn about our learners to create personas that
inform our learner experience maps and designs.
Good design always has and will continue to be the
foundation for successful virtual learning. Not only is it
important to thoughtfully design learner experiences that
integrate all four dimensions, but we also need to create
learning environments where virtual participants are engaged
and supported. Moving forward, I encourage you to continue
developing and practicing your knowledge and skills in LXD
and the experience design capability.
In the next chapter, we focus on how to optimize learner
engagement and performance outcomes. Specifically, we’ll
look at how to help learners thrive by shaping successful
virtual learning environments.
Pro Tips for Practicing Your
Experience Design Skills
TIP 1
Apply LXD by leading with experience, not content.
TIP 2
Use traditional learning objectives to drive design, but reframe
the objectives shared with learners to be more motivational for
them.
TIP 3
Integrate the four learning dimensions throughout the virtual
learning experiences you design.
TIP 4
Be empathic by prioritizing your learners’ perspective over
your own design ideas, decisions, and preferences.
TIP 5
Include target virtual learners in the early design process to
solicit their feedback and gain their perspective on course
design.

TIP 6
Create fictional virtual learner personas to guide your designs
for larger-scale virtual training programs.
TIP 7
Create an experience map to envision your participants’ virtual
learning journey from start to finish.
TIP 8
Apply the peak-end rule by triggering learners’ memories of
what has mattered most to them in the learning experience.
TIP 9
Revamp your paradigm of a traditional four-walled classroom
to an open, shared virtual learning space instead.

“In order for online learning to be successful, developers need
to create environments in which people can effectively learn.”
—Jennifer Hofmann, Founder and CEO of InSync Training

Shaping a Successful
Virtual Learning
Environment
The key to cultivating a successful learning environment is the
virtual facilitator. This is because the synchronous facilitator—
in partnership with the producer—is responsible for nurturing
the environment that enables learners to blossom. Through
their actions, tone, and words—whether they realize it or not
—they can shape a positive, inclusive, and productive
environment for virtual learning. The opposite is also true.
Virtual facilitators and producers can inadvertently create
environments that feel content-centric, sterile, apathetic,
routine, intimidating, non-supportive, or even critical. Not
only can this be a toxic environment, but it could create
disengagement and hinder learning.
Although we tend to focus more on what happens inside an
environment, we should realize that what happens within is
influenced by the wrapper around it. In the context of virtual
training, how learners and facilitators interact is shaped by the
environment. For example, the degree to which learners
choose to participate, whether they feel unwelcomed or
undervalued, how safe they feel about speaking up even when
they disagree, and how they are treated when they make
mistakes during skill practices are all influenced by their
surrounding environment.
Functional and healthy environments can be the foundation
for building positive working relationships, learner-to-learner
and instructor-to-learner, as established in chapter 2.

“Participants need to feel like they have developed personal
rapport with the instructor. It is even more important in an
online environment than the traditional approach” (Hofmann
2004). When we successfully connect with learners and they
connect with us, it can make all the difference for learning.
Virtual training technology platforms also play a role. The
technology influences design decisions and facilitator
behavior. Facilitators, in turn, shape the learning environment
based on their decisions and actions. Then this learning
environment shapes learners and their overall experience. So,
technological platforms kickstart a domino effect of sorts by
influencing a string of elements. According to the 2021
Educause Horizon Report, Teaching and Learning Edition,
“As the adoption of blended or hybrid learning models has
accelerated, so too has the adoption of new learning
technologies and tools that support and even shape the
implementation of those models” (Pelletier et al. 2021).
This leads us to the next capability, environment shaping.
Virtual trainers need to know how to skillfully create positive,
productive environments. But how should a virtual facilitator
do this? Ideally, learning environments support all four
dimensions of learning (cognitive, emotional, social, and
behavioral) to combat learner disengagement and reduce the
temptation to multitask. Overall, this chapter answers the
question: What can facilitators do to ensure virtual learners are
comfortable and connected in their learning environment so
they can actively contribute in meaningful ways?
THE BIG IDEA
Just as facilitators shape learning environments,
learning environments shape learners and their
overall experience.
What Is a Learning Environment?
The live online learning environment is a living ecosystem. It
projects a feel, tone, and energy where cultural norms dictate
acceptable and unacceptable behavior. These surroundings
also dictate whether the space will be collaborative or

competitive, welcoming or distant, conversational or rote, led
with credible professionalism or fraught with technical chaos.
Environment shaping, then, includes everything a virtual
trainer or online educator does to influence this ecosystem.
Shaping an environment encompasses all the little and big
things facilitators, as leaders of the environment, say or don’t
say, do or don’t do, react to or don’t react to. These are the
established norms that lay the foundation for how the virtual
training session will go and how all the interdependent parts
will interact within it.
In this chapter, we specifically look at ways facilitators can
develop their capability in environment shaping. We explore
the 5 Cs Pyramid to understand the learner experience, lay out
the welcome mat with activities before class, lead live sessions
with enthusiasm and personalization, and foster psychological
safety for learners. Regardless of how shiny the training
technology’s bells and whistles might be, at the end of the day,
it’s always still about people and learning.
The 5 Cs Pyramid: Staged Progression for
Virtual Learners
The heart of this book is learner-centered experiences, as
discussed in chapter 2. After 20 years of training online, I’ve
noticed that many virtual learners experience a progression of
mental stages when they join a virtual training session.
Sometimes, they appear to fully progress through all these
stages in only seconds, while for others, it may be much
slower. I call these different stages the 5 Cs Pyramid (Figure
3-1). The usefulness of this pyramid is that it reminds you to
be empathic toward the learner experience.
Figure 3-1. The Virtual Learner’s 5 Cs Pyramid

The goal, of course, is to move learners through all the
stages as soon as possible without getting stuck in any one
phase. It is important to note that much of this movement
usually remains subconscious. For example, a learner may not
actively think, “Is it safe for me to say something here?”
Instead, they might think “I don’t want to look stupid” or “I
don’t want to embarrass myself” without articulating those
feelings aloud. Let’s examine each of the 5 Cs more closely.
1. Cautious
This is the first stage, when learners log into a platform and
internally ask themselves any number of questions reflecting
early caution. For example, they may ask themselves, “Did I
click the right link?” “Am I in the right class?” “Is my tech
working?” “Can everyone hear me and see me?” “Can I hear
and see others?” “Should I be on camera because everyone
else is?” “If I click this, will I lose my chat?”
Being cautious about entering a new space makes sense.
This might be analogous to your first day at a new job where
you need to report to a building to pick up your computer and
meet your manager. “Is this the right building?” “Did I find the
right reception area?” “What do I need to show for security?”
“Am I parked in the right lot?” You remain cautious until you
collect more information. Once you ascertain answers to these
pressing questions, you begin to settle in. The same is true for
virtual learners. Being cautious as they log into virtual training
is natural because it’s a new class. In this chapter, we’ll
explore several strategies to move learners from caution to
higher levels in the pyramid.

2. Curious
After moving past caution, learners realize they can be seen
and heard and are in the right place. Next, they’re curious.
Their subconscious thoughts might be “Who else is here?”
“Have my colleagues joined yet?” “Anyone I know?” “What
do I think of them?” “Which one is the trainer?” Keep in mind
these thoughts may remain subconscious and may not even be
articulated.
Human beings are naturally curious. It’s normal and
perfectly acceptable. Again, our goal is not to force learners to
skip this stage, but instead help them move through it. This
stage might be analogous to a graduate attending a graduation
ceremony. Because you’re curious as a graduate first walking
into the ceremony, you might be looking around to check
who’s there. You might scan the crowd for people you know
because you’re more comfortable around those people.
Additionally, you might be curious about who’s going to hand
you your diploma, who’s speaking at the lectern, and the path
you’ll take to get to the stage.
Notice how the emotional dimension is the underpinning of
this stage as well. And likeability—whether we like it or not—
also comes into play. In this stage, learners may ask “Do I like
my facilitator?” “Is my facilitator credible?” “Are they
professional?” “Will they just cover stuff I already know?”
“Who else is on camera?” “Does my hair really look like
that?”
As learners are looking for answers to their curious
questions, they may miss things you are saying when you
begin your virtual training class. Curious thoughts take priority
and capture initial attention. So, rather than diving in
immediately when you begin your virtual training session, you
might just reference the kinds of questions they’re already
thinking and acknowledge them aloud. For example, you
might say, “It’s great to have 15 of us here today from 10
different companies across Europe.” Or you can make sure
that if you have critical opening comments, you signal their
importance by slowing down your delivery for emphasis, and
repeating them: “This is so important I’ll say it again,” or

leading with a verbal signpost like “One of the most important
things you’ll hear today is …” We’ll explore techniques like
these more in chapters 4 and 6. These are ways to ensure you
can redirect learners’ curiosity back to what you’re saying.
3. Comfortable
Imagine you were invited to attend a dinner party at someone
else’s house for the first time. As you arrive and they invite
you inside, the space is new to you, and they direct you where
to place your shoes and offer to take your coat. They may ask
you if you would like a drink, and perhaps show you to the
living room. They may even offer you a tour of their home.
How welcomed and safe you feel in the space dictates your
comfort. This comfort level then influences whether and how
you participate and share in the space that is not yours. You
are very aware that you are the guest in this scenario.
In virtual training, learners may feel like guests in a virtual
space because they are not hosting. They did not invite others,
they were invited. Initially, learners understand that they
surrender some amount of power to the host or leader of the
event when they enter a space. However, throughout the
course of the session you can and should give learners more
voice, more challenge, and more power. This means they do
more, and you do less. For them to spread their wings, take
initiative, and speak up more, you need to ensure they feel
comfortable in the space and eventually transition from
comfortable guest to empowered contributor in the final stage.
4. Connecting
Let’s say you were recently hired for a new job and will be
working on-site two days a week and then remote for the
remainder. There are likely some questions you have that are
more pressing than others. For example, on day one, you may
care more about where your office or workspace is when you
work on-site, how close you are to the restroom, where the
cafeteria is and how to get there, what computer, monitors, and
equipment you’ll be using, where to go to get your security
badge, and how to locate your manager if they also work on-

site a few days per week. Getting answers to these questions
can take priority as you settle in. However, after you have
found the answers, you will feel ready to meet people, learn
their names and what they do at the company, and form
relationships.
In a similar way, once learners acclimate to the virtual
learning environment and have moved through the stages of
caution and curiosity and become more comfortable, they are
ready to start testing the waters and connecting with others.
Connecting is about finding commonality, building positive
work relationships, developing give and take, interacting
socially, and learning about each other. This C clearly ties into
the social dimension of learning discussed in chapter 2.
We know that connecting with people in productive ways is
an important part of acclimating. Even brief introductions or
sharing where you’re connecting from in chat can inspire
receptiveness and a willingness to broaden one’s connections.
As the facilitator, you can provide brief opportunities to spark
interpersonal connection by leading exercises on whiteboards
where learners can select an image or identify a word that
most describes them.
One of the best ways to conduct introductions is through
small breakouts near the beginning of class. People will feel
more comfortable sharing and connecting in small groups at
first, which warms them up for large group discussion later.
(We’ll talk more about this in chapter 7.) You can provide
brief instructions like “Share your name, organization, role,
and favorite type of pet.” This way, in small groups of three to
four people, participants can each take approximately a minute
to introduce themselves, so it takes less time collectively. The
pet prompt also sparks some fun and is an inroad to help
people form bonds as they perhaps discover with delight that
they both like dogs best, or hamsters, or perhaps, on a rare
occasion, a pot-bellied pig. They may respond in kind by
saying “Hey, horses are my favorite too!” Social connection
has begun.
PRO TIP 10

Build community with connecting activities (even
brief ones) to foster social learning and help
learners discover commonality with one another.
5. Contributing
The final stage is a learner’s interest and readiness to actively
contribute in meaningful ways. Once a learner knows they are
in the right place, have figured out who else is there and who
they know, are beginning to feel more ease and comfort and
likewise have let their guard down a bit, and have begun
connecting with others, they are now more likely to contribute.
We discussed how the social dimension of learning was linked
to connecting. Ideally, contributing actively builds on all four
dimensions of learning (cognitive, emotional, social, and
behavioral). Evidence-based research suggests psychological
engagement is essential for learning, and the cognitive and
emotional dimensions together comprise this psychological
engagement that can then lead to more social interaction and
related activities (Clark 2020).
Overall, the 5 Cs Pyramid reminds us to support learners as
they progress through the stages from cautious all the way to
contributing as soon as possible. And we do not want them to
remain stuck in one along the way. Our end goal is for them to
be ready to actively give and receive. By contributing, I don’t
mean clicking an animated thumbs-up reaction or voting in a
poll, as these are more surface-level contributions, although
they can lead to more. Rather, I mean that the small opening of
their contribution ideally grows throughout to the point where
they share a professional experience or story that connects
with the training material, build on their prior knowledge and
share likewise in chat or in a breakout, talk about insights
they’re having from the training content, ask thoughtful
questions, fully practice skills learned in class, take part in the
role plays, actively listen and share in breakout groups, or
offer feedback to others during a skill practice. These are just a
few of the many ways learners can engage and contribute to
the overall learning experience.
PRO TIP 11

Reference the 5 Cs Pyramid to guide your
empathic responses to virtual learners as they first
acclimate.
Virtual 
facilitators 
need 
to 
shape 
virtual 
learning
environments so they are conducive to learners progressing up
the pyramid from cautious to contributing. Using the 5 Cs as
our guide, let’s look next at strategies to help facilitators do
this. These strategies include laying out the welcome mat,
opening live sessions with enthusiasm and personalization,
and cultivating psychological safety with learners. All these
strategies support the environment shaping capability. The
skills needed for this capability include communication skills,
clarifying expectations, proactively minimizing interruptions,
rapport building, facilitating learners discovering their
commonality, and, ultimately, building community.
Laying Out the Welcome Mat
Nurturing a positive and welcoming virtual learning
environment is the natural outcome of a learner-centric
approach. When virtual trainers are empathic to the learner
experience, they recognize the importance of first impressions
and how the communications and lead-up to a session can set
the tone for class. To be learner-centric, facilitators should
greet their class in such a way that learners immediately feel
welcomed, seen, and heard. In other words, you want to lay
out the welcome mat.
Laying out the welcome mat is everything we do
beforehand to set the right tone for class. Notably, it reminds
us to set expectations for productive and positive learning.
Participants should also immediately feel they have entered a
supportive space with positive energy. It only takes minutes to
create a favorable or unfavorable impression, and sometimes
even less.
As we’ve established, our goal is to help learners move
from cautious to contributing. Of course, you would also
welcome them in real time on class day. In this section, we’ll
focus specifically on three things you can do to welcome them
through multiple touchpoints before they come to a live online

session. First, you can send learners a pre-session
communication to set expectations above and beyond the one
they may receive automatically from their LMS. Second, you
can send a welcome video for participants to view ahead of
time. And third, you can meet for a brief tech check before
class if the platform is new to them or if they are new to the
venue.
PRO TIP 12
Welcome participants via multiple touchpoints in
multiple ways.
Establish Expectations in Pre-Session
Communication
When you plot out a learner experience map as we discussed
in chapter 2, you will be able to view and improve on all the
touchpoints a learner will receive, and this will help you make
decisions about timing and which messaging should come
when. Many learning management systems allow you to
customize automatic messages as reminders sent to learners
about upcoming virtual training. These automated messages
communicate to learners that they’re registered, when the class
or program will take place, and the technology required. This
is certainly an opportunity to customize the LMS messaging
by including rewritten learning objectives that are more
motivational for learners (as discussed in chapter 2) along with
the expectations for the training program. For example, one
expectation might be that the training is interactive, and they
should come ready to participate.
It’s also helpful to incorporate an email welcome
communication from the trainer. LMS emails are rarely
brimming with personality. So, in addition to the automated
invite that comes from the LMS with necessary links, dates,
and times, send a welcome email just from you to share your
excitement about the class and that you are looking forward to
working with them. This allows you to personalize pre-session
messaging and is also an opportunity for learners to hear
directly 
from 
you 
beforehand. 
When 
you 
level-set
expectations in any pre-session messaging, it can be a great

way to alleviate the learners’ first and second Cs of the 5 Cs
pyramid. Learners may have some level of anxiety and feel
cautious as well as curious about the class. Use pre-session
emails to help address those questions ahead of time and
showcase your excitement, which helps them look forward to
it. Then when they join the live virtual training session, they’ll
be able to move quicker through the 5 Cs, so you can get them
to the contributing stage earlier.
It is also important in pre-session messaging to remind
learners to find an area free from distractions for virtual
training. You should still remind participants of this at the
outset of the session, but finding a quiet area is best
accomplished well before the training begins. Advise them to
find a space where they can close a door if possible, and to
inform those they live with or who work nearby that they’re in
a training session and should not be disturbed. I sometimes
post a sign on my door that reminds people to be quiet as they
walk by.
PRO TIP 13
Continuously incentivize and reward active
participation from learners.
Send a Welcome Video
One of the best ways to ensure your virtual training session
gets off to a great start is to create an instructor welcome video
(Figure 3-2). This video can help set the tone for a productive
live online class and set expectations for the class. More
importantly, it can also alleviate some of the caution and
curiosity learners might have when they first join a virtual
training session, jumpstart the relationship building between
the learner and facilitator, and prepare participants to
contribute sooner. If they’ve already had a chance to see you
in a video, they know what you look like, which helps address
their curiosity about you. Ideally, you want them to find you
friendly and approachable. As a client of mine put it, “Adding
a video introduction of yourself will also allow the learner to
connect with you right away so once the course has started,
they feel they already know you and have built some form of

relationship with you. I believe this will also give the learner
some form of comfort upon arrival and it’s a great way to
break the ice.”
Make your video available for learners to view one week
before your live online class, and require this as part of their
pre-work. When I teach a program that will meet multiple
times, I always include a welcome video for participants to
view a week before we begin. This is not so far in advance that
they will forget what I said in the video, and it’s not last-
minute either. I usually include a link to my welcome video in
my welcoming instructor communication; other times, my
client will send out my welcome communication with the link
to the video, or I’ll post the video in the LMS as pre-work for
them. (A sample script of a welcome video is included in
chapter 11.)
Figure 3-2. Still Image of Trainer Welcome Video
What Are the Elements of a Successful Welcome
Video?
Begin with the end in mind. Identify the result or final effect
you want the welcome video to have on your learners. For
example, you want them to come away from the video excited
about and looking forward to the course. This ties into the
emotional factor of motivation that we’ll talk more about in
chapter 4. As author Clark Quinn (2021) articulates,

“Motivation starts before the experience really begins. We
want to have learners eager for the experience.” Your pre-
session welcome video message can sow the seeds of
enthusiasm for learners. The video can also showcase you and
your presence.
Your welcome video can be shot on a mobile device
depending on the quality of your camera. Alternatively, you
can record yourself speaking from your desktop or laptop
computer using its camera. Be sure to follow the guidelines in
chapter 5 for how to come across effectively on camera when
you record. To strengthen the impact of your welcome video,
consider the following best practices:
• Convey enthusiasm for the topic by genuinely being
excited yourself. Smile as you talk (when appropriate to
what you’re saying). You want to convey that you are
approachable, likable, and friendly to develop rapport.
• Build your professional credibility by sharing a few things
about yourself, such as how long you’ve been training and
your years of experience with the training topic.
• Set expectations for course work. For example, if it will be
a blended learning program (see chapter 11), let them
know the different course components. Share that there
will be both asynchronous and synchronous work. Clarify
that they will need to complete pre-work assignments
before each live session. If they will be expected do a
final presentation or final teach-back, give them this
head’s up in the welcome video as well.
• Avoid referencing specific information that would outdate
your welcome video so you can re-use it for repeat runs of
this program or training class. For example, say the title of
the course but avoid mentioning any dates.
• Keep it brief—between one and two minutes. Video
messages should be to-the-point and serve to introduce
you and course expectations, enough to satisfy
participants’ caution and curiosity, and also start building
connections. Anything more than three minutes is too
long for a welcome video.

• Consider adding text overlays to show a few words
onscreen next to you while you talk about them; for
example, display “Action Plans” when you talk about how
everyone will complete an action plan at the end of the
virtual training program to be shared with their manager.
You can use products like Camtasia or other video editors
to add the text overlays.
• For a nuanced professional touch, add instrumental music
to the background of your welcome video. Obviously,
your words and image are the feature of the video, and the
music underneath should support the video’s function.
Ensure the volume of the music is very low. Music should
never call attention to itself, be distracting, make it
difficult to understand what you’re saying, or compete
with your messaging. Alternatively, you could add music
to the intro and the outro to infuse energy into the opening
and close. Video editing software makes it easy for you to
select royalty-free music assets and sound effects that
you’re free to use without copyright clearance. For
example, several musical selections are available to
choose from right within the Camtasia Studio Library
during your video editing. To prevent an abrupt stop to the
music when your video ends, use the program’s audio
features to fade it out for a smoother close.
• Require learners to view the video by a deadline (like the
day before the first class begins), and create a worksheet
to ensure they check it off and let you know it’s complete.
Or set up the training program in the LMS so that it will
track completion of items; then you can run reports to
track whether learners have viewed the video. One
technique that works effectively is generating an
automatic reminder email to follow up individually with
those who have not yet completed it a day before the
deadline.
Conduct a Tech Check
To mitigate and alleviate initial caution when learners are new
to a platform, you might consider scheduling a tech check a

few days or a week before the session. I conduct these one-on-
ones with learners if I know I’m teaching employees who are
new to a specific platform. They leave the tech check knowing
how to do it and have the confidence they can do it again (for
example, they have confirmed their platform access,
functioning audio, functioning camera, and their ability to
successfully view and interact with the interface). I usually
plan 10-minute slots during a drop-in window of time. The
benefit of a one-on-one tech check is that it not only alleviates
stress about the technology issues and allows you time to
resolve issues well before class begins, but also you are
afforded the opportunity to get to know your learners more
intimately.
Minimize Distractions
Just as you can create a welcoming in-person environment
conducive to the type of interaction you hope to have, you can
also create a welcoming online environment by reducing
distractions and handling interruptions well. Intermediate and
advanced facilitators do what they can to minimize
interruptions and distractions for their learners throughout
virtual training. Some preventive measures you can take with
learners include pre-class messages encouraging them to find
an area free from distraction or noise, and reminders when you
go over netiquette at the outset of virtual training to close
applications, turn off phone notifications, and find a quiet
space.
But what about when interruptions occur during virtual
training? If there’s feedback in the audio or you hear people
talking in the background or dogs barking, you want to address
that right away. If it’s allowed to continue, your learners will
be distracted by it. You can ask your producer through private
chat to find the person with their mic on and have them muted;
if you have a seasoned producer, they may be on top of that
already without you asking. As the facilitator, you could also
calmly and politely say, “We’re getting some audio
background noise. Again, we appreciate you muting your line
as a courtesy to colleagues when you’re not speaking. Thanks,
everyone.”

Learners can also be inwardly distracted. You can address
this by acknowledging where they’ve been and then refocus
them to be present. For example, you might say, “You may
have just come from a meeting where your deadline was
moved up or you just got off a video call that added items to
your to-do list. But let’s set that all aside for now, and you can
pick it up again after this class. Right now, let’s turn our
attention to this moment and be present here for the next 90
minutes together. I encourage you to make the most of it. This
professional development time is for you.”
PRO TIP 14
Proactively minimize potential distractions and
interruptions to promote learning.
Opening Live Sessions With Enthusiasm and
Personalization
The opening of a virtual training session is where the tone is
set and the environment begins to take shape. Therefore, it’s
important to take several steps on the front-end to do this well.
For example, to effectively shape a learning environment, you
should open and lead with upbeat, positive enthusiasm. This
effervescence can create a communal space that learners want
to be a part of, instead of run from.
Additionally, when you open a virtual training session,
remember to always explain why the training is needed. As
cognitive psychologist Clark Quinn (2021) notes, “We should
introduce the audience to what they’ll learn, touching on why
they should care, and what it will provide for them. Opening
up learners emotionally is an investment in the retention of
learning.” By touching on the WIIFM (what’s in it for me?),
we trigger intrinsic motivation for learners to be more present
in the experience. Once they know why they should care and
how a training program might benefit them, this influences
their motivation to be attentive. It also serves us well to
remember to engage learners with all four core dimensions of
learning (in addition to emotion as part of learner motivation).
Moreover, our goal is to move learners from the cautious
stage to the contributing stage as soon as possible. To do this,

there are different techniques we can use when we greet
participants, provide a brief platform tour, clarify netiquette,
include 
to-the-point 
introductions, 
and 
elicit 
learner
participation from the outset. Let’s explore these next.
Greet Participants With Enthusiasm
Developing capability in environment shaping helps you be
mindful of the little things you can do to create a positive
environment. One of those little things is projecting the energy
that you want your learners to also demonstrate. Enthusiasm
has always been a hallmark of great teachers, educators, and
trainers. Energy is contagious, and whether it’s negative or
positive, it can trickle down easily to learners.
For example, a virtual facilitator who begins a session
frustrated and upset about a technical issue that just happened
can unintentionally poison the energy of what could have
otherwise been a positive environment. Contrast this with a
facilitator who begins virtual sessions with passion and
enthusiasm for the topic. Best-in-class online facilitators are
genuinely excited about the training topic (for some topics, we
need to dig deep and find the “nugget”), as this also helps with
the emotional dimension of learning to spark the same feelings
in virtual learners.
Remember, too, that energy takes a hit online. Work to
project twice the level of passion, energy, and enthusiasm you
would normally have because of what can be lost through the
electronic transmission. As one of my colleagues in the field
put it best, if the trainer is not excited, why should the learners
be?
Use Learners’ Names Often
One of the best ways to engage learners with enthusiasm is to
greet them by name as they first log in. Although it’s generally
not feasible to do this for every learner entry, you can still do it
intermittently or by greeting them in batches. Your producer
may also do this for you while you attend to last-minute
review of your notes or prep. For example, every few minutes
you could greet different individuals you see joining, saying

“Good morning, Krister, Claudia, and Ji-Ho. Great to have you
with us! We’ll get started here in just a few minutes.” Or
“Welcome everyone! I see Naomi and Ahmed just joined us,
good morning, good afternoon, and good evening wherever
you are in the world. We’ll begin in just about five minutes.”
Speaking learners’ first names aloud is effective because
most people have been responding to their names since birth,
and it becomes a deeply ingrained response. So, when we hear
our first name called, we immediately sit up a little straighter
and give the speaker our full attention. This personalization is
a level of customization that is easy to do and makes it feel
like you’re talking directly to participants—a personal and
memorable touch!
Incorporate Learners’ Names Into Examples
You can also offer customized examples in your training topics
and insert some of your participants’ names into these
examples for added focus. So if you were training on
negotiation skills, you might say “One of our key concepts is
to recognize that when the person with whom I’m negotiating
says no, it is not the end of the conversation, it is only the
beginning. For example, let’s assume Austin and Travis are
having this discussion, and Travis says no. So, Austin digs
deeper by asking probing questions to uncover what the core
premise is underneath Travis’s no response. Once Austin
understands Travis’s objection, he can figure out a way to
address the concern, and from there, work toward a
compromise.” In this example, Austin and Travis are listening
intently because they have been woven into the content, as are
the other participants because they’re listening to see if their
names will be used too.
PRO TIP 15
Build connection with personalization, calling
learners by their first names throughout and
weaving their names into customized examples to grab
learner attention.
Display Welcoming Messages

Welcoming learners while you’re on camera is an effective
way to convey enthusiasm. By being on camera, you’ll find
that others are more likely to turn on their cameras too. This
means you would not project any slides but greet participants
on camera to establish relationships instead. At the close of
your session, you can come back on camera as you bid
farewell to all. This serves as a nice bookend for kickoff and
closing out the virtual training.
Another technique is to include a welcoming title slide. This
slide, with correct title of program, again helps assure learners
they are in the right place and accelerates them out of the
cautious zone.
Additionally, you can post a welcome message in chat
before learners arrive. This way, they’ll see it when they first
log in. At SkillPath, when we trained in virtual sessions, we
always posted a welcoming message to participants in chat on
the various platforms. We were also trained to change the
color of our text in chat, so the facilitator text would pop out
for learners, which is something we used a lot in Adobe
Connect. However, depending on your platform this could
have adverse effects. In Adobe Connect, Zoom, and other
platforms, I’m used to typing in my welcome in chat 30
minutes beforehand as I get set up. One time when I used
Microsoft Teams, however, I typed a welcome in the chat so it
would be ready to go when learners arrived. But, connected
through Teams’ chat, my learners received the message in real
time, and I received several messages back along the lines of,
“I thought we were starting at 10 a.m.” or, “Did the training
get moved up to 9:30?” Oops! I learned to not send my
message early in some platforms. I chatted back letting them
know they could disregard the message I was prepping for
setup, and that they were correct about the start time.
Acknowledge International Attendees
If you know you have attendees from several countries or a
mix of time zones, acknowledge this to all. Remember,
learners want to be seen. If they’re joining in the middle of the
night, they also often wish to share this extra effort with
everyone. For example, you might hear them say “Very early

morning here in XXX” or “Joining after hours from XXX.”
So, when you begin, you might say something like, “Good
morning, good afternoon, and good evening wherever you are
in the world.”
Novice virtual trainers often focus solely on their own
location. For example, they might say, “It’s raining and cloudy
where I am.” But the training session is not about us. Better to
say, “Let me know in chat what the weather is doing where
you are. It’s raining here. Ahh, warm and sunny in Florida, but
rainy and cold in Seattle, and dark, cold, and the middle of the
night for …” You can briefly acknowledge what the weather is
where you are as an example, but then shine the spotlight back
on your participants. This is a way to strategically break the
ice and can be used as another tactic to help learners move
from cautious to contribute on the 5 Cs Pyramid.
The environment shaping capability also includes being
respectful of all cultures. For international, cross-cultural
classes, you should thoughtfully weigh the start times of the
sessions to best accommodate learners, varying the start time
if it’s a recurring class or finding the best alternate times to
hold live class by collecting input from some of the actual
learners. When I’ve taught international sessions, I’ve
sometimes taken a night shift if it meant the class would take
place during daytime for the attendees.
Take Learners on a Brief Platform Tour
Establishing where everything is located on a platform and
how to find it is important to always include at the start of a
virtual training session. Once learners establish where
everything is, and it becomes more automated for them, their
working memory is freed up to focus on the content instead of
where that button is. To incorporate the doing aspect of the
behavioral dimension of learning, it’s great to have them do a
fun, easy warm-up using that feature or tool while you talk
about it. For example, the brief tour might remind them where
chat is and ask them to type what time they woke up that
morning as a fun warm-up. Then show them where the hand-
raising feature is and have them practice lowering and raising

their hands. You can also remind them how to mute
themselves and turn on their cameras, and where to locate their
annotation toolbar.
Although I always recommend a brief platform tour at the
outset, I also recommend reminding learners again right before
you ask them to use a feature or tool (if it’s more complicated
to find). Repetition, repetition, repetition. For example, when
you ask them to use their annotation toolbar while you’re
presenting slides or bring up a whiteboard, remind them where
they can locate that feature.
Note that part of this task is to acknowledge that tools may
be in a different location than other platforms they’ve used
before, or they may even appear different than yours because
you are logged in as host or organizer. Thus, it’s always
helpful to have a separate monitor where you are also logged
in as a participant, in addition to your host login. For example,
in Zoom, for participants to annotate a slide while the
facilitator is screen sharing, participants need to click View
Options in the menu at the top of the Zoom window to see the
Annotate option. However, for facilitators, when you’re screen
sharing, you can click Annotate in the Floating Controls
Toolbar, which then opens the annotation toolbar for you. In
addition, a second monitor can help you observe firsthand any
delays for learners as you advance slides. I remember using a
platform years ago where there was a two-second delay after I
switched my slides before learners saw what I was seeing. So,
back then I had to remind myself to count “one-one thousand,
two-one thousand” in my head before I started talking about
the slide after I advanced it.
Establish Netiquette Guidelines
Some call them ground rules; others call them housekeeping
items. I prefer to call them netiquette, a portmanteau of
internet and etiquette. We use these to establish expectations
for respectful interactions and how we agree to be together in
the shared, virtual space. Although some guidelines should
also be communicated in the pre-session messaging, you can
reinforce them as you open the virtual training session.

Setting expectations like clarifying netiquette, how to
minimize distractions, and how to communicate with learners
and the trainer also have ties to improved performance
outcomes. According to a 2021 ATD research report on virtual
training, “Nearly all expectation-setting practices for learners
identified for the research had significant connections to better
organizational performance.” For 
example, muting is
important unless speaking if you have a larger group of
learners who are in noisy environments. However, if you have
eight or fewer learners and they are in relatively quiet
locations, you might want to ask them to not mute. The reason
for this is because muting can kill conversation since the need
to unmute creates a tiny bit of friction before participating.
Removing that friction can aid in fostering richer, more fluid,
and deeper discussions.
Some items to include on a netiquette slide are:
• “We want to hear from everyone. This is your class. Be
prepared to fully participate.”
• “Please mute if there is distracting noise in your
background.”
• “Be respectful of each other’s comments, suggestions,
insights, and questions. We value inclusivity.”
• “Make sure you are in an environment free of distraction.
Close your door, minimize any applications on your
device, set your phone to vibrate, close your email, and so
on.”
• “Ask lots of questions—there are no right or wrong
questions today.”
• “Chat will be available during most of our virtual training
session. We will be turning it off during focus sections.
Please keep your typed responses to a few phrases or
words in chat instead of multiple sentences to ensure
scannable viewing for all.”
• “Let our producer know in the technical chat pod if you
have any technical issues.”

In your netiquette guidelines, you might also recommend
learners hide their self-view on camera after they’ve
appropriately adjusted themselves in the camera frame, and
offer the steps to do so. I recommend people learn how to hide
their self-view because it can become a distraction. According
to Harvard Business School professor Amy Edmondson and
leadership consultant Gene Daley, “Seeing oneself on the
screen 
can 
heighten 
self-consciousness, 
inhibiting
psychological safety. Selecting ‘hide self-view’ can help”
(Edmondson and Daley 2020). Since people are generally
drawn to looking at themselves when they talk, like they’re
looking in a mirror, they won’t be focusing on the other
learners or the facilitator. You’ll even notice some people
adjusting their hair as they look at their reflected image.
Because of this popular tendency, Microsoft Teams has even
moved the live camera of oneself on the platform away from
the images of everyone else. This is one way to direct more
attention to everyone else’s photos and live video.
You want to establish netiquette boundaries in three ways:
visually, verbally, and behaviorally. These parameters guide
how learners agree to meet in this space going forward. It’s
also helpful to display a slide that has pictorial representations
with some reminder text to illustrate what the guidelines are.
These reminders are also reinforced by the facilitator and
producer as leaders of the live event.
Clarifying netiquette behaviorally means that learners must
be called out right away if any of the rules are not upheld. For
example, if you have a group of 20 and have asked them to
mute, but you hear background noise that continues for several
seconds, you can look at the participant panel to see who has
their mic on, ask if there’s anything they would like to
contribute, and then ask them politely to mute in accordance
with the agreed-upon netiquette. When there is immediate
follow-up, learners quickly grasp that these guidelines are
being enforced, which encourages greater cooperation.
You might also direct them to close their email, turn off
email notifications, close applications they won’t be using,
silence their mobile devices, or even remove their mobile
devices from the immediate area unless you’ll be using them

during class. And as is the case with all adult learners, always
explain why. Adults need the rationale. Let them know
research has found that processing takes a hit when we are task
switching, and we are unable to process as deeply.
Additionally, closing applications that are not needed for class
conserves their bandwidth. Another important and often
forgotten piece of behavior reinforcement is expert modeling.
Facilitators should model good netiquette by ensuring there is
no distracting audio in the background, making sure your live
video is professional and you are on camera for important
interactions, being respectful in words and actions when others
offer comments, and welcoming all training-related questions
whether they be major or minor.
PRO TIP 16
Communicate netiquette expectations at the
outset and reinforce them throughout if needed.
Use Get-to-the-Point Introductions
Another common error for virtual trainers is the temptation to
provide a lengthy introduction about themselves. Bottom line:
Learners don’t care about these details. Yes, it’s important to
establish credibility as a trainer and to combat distractions and
multitasking. However, when a facilitator introduction turns
into extensive background information, related degrees, the
history of whatever, and the why behind the why, it can
quickly escalate to a snooze fest.
As a best practice, keep your on-camera intro brief and to-
the-point. Brevity is always better. Your producer may even
introduce you or your customer or the manager of the
employees with whom you’re training. If not, go ahead and
introduce yourself.
Regarding participant introductions, keep these brief as
well, so you don’t spend half an hour on introductions when
the class is only 90 minutes. That’s a third of live class time!
Instead try intros in small group breakouts or via chat by
having learners share their name, their role in their
organization, and another item related to the training topic.
You might also address this through whiteboard activities.

Elicit Learner Participation From the Outset
When learners first log in to a virtual training, they arrive from
a variety of different states and activities (some just finished a
meeting, others just presented to a board, others were working
independently on some writing, and so on). As we will explore
further in the next chapter, to make the most out of the
learning experience, participants need to move from their
current resting, passive state to an active, engaged state. They
need help fighting the inertia of sitting back and not getting
involved.
The key is to never allow learners to remain in this passive
sit-and-get state, because it becomes increasingly difficult to
transition them out of it. Instead, we want to involve them
from the very beginning. For example, when learners first join
you might give them something to do, such as introduce
themselves in the chat. Alternatively, you might display a
looping slideshow that includes information about the
facilitator, expectations for the course, some of the platform
tools you’ll be using, and an assignment like answering a trivia
question. It’s always more impactful if your trivia question can
tie into your training topic as well.
When there is not a lot of change or movement, learners can
also habituate to the environment and begin to pay less
attention, which we will discuss further in chapter 8. In this
state of lowered attentiveness, they are not giving their full
attention to the information. For this reason, we want to be
talking with them, calling on them, using their names in
examples, demonstrating things, and actively having them do
something.
However, there is a fine line; be careful not to include too
many actions for learners when they first log in and as they are
waiting for class to begin, which can overload learners.
Remember they’re acclimating through the 5 Cs, and having to
take on multiple tasks right away might cause them to remain
in the cautious stage. Assigning one clear task is acceptable,
but a class of novice virtual learners, for example, should not
be tasked with six things to do when they first log in.

Up to this point in the chapter we’ve covered strategies for
laying out the welcome mat and opening with enthusiasm. To
ensure learners feel comfortable with the environment you’re
shaping and with you the facilitator and their fellow learners,
we can draw on findings for what makes teams click. Google
set out to find what makes the most effective teams in an
experiment called Project Aristotle. Over several years, after
analyzing more than 180 teams, researchers determined five
key characteristics of effective teams, and top of the list was
psychological safety (Burnison 2019). Let’s examine this now.
PRO TIP 17
Include brief, to-the-point introductions for initial
connection through chat, breakouts, whiteboard
activities, or even verbal introductions when class size
is small.
Cultivating Psychological Safety
In 1999, organizational behavioral scientist and professor Amy
Edmondson coined the term psychological safety. According
to Edmondson (2019), “Psychological safety describes a
climate where people feel safe enough to take interpersonal
risks by speaking up and sharing concerns, questions, or
ideas.” A psychologically safe environment is one where
everyone believes they won’t be punished or embarrassed for
taking risks around others. In other words, they feel safe to
admit a mistake, entertain productive disagreement, ask for
help, generate ideas, or share a critical comment for the sake
of improvement and productivity. I have high standards for
virtual trainers, and one of them is digging deep and caring.
The popular axiom is true: People don’t care what you know
until they know that you care.
Edmondson is also quick to point out that psychological
safety does not necessarily mean squelching conflict. Learners
need to know they are in a safe space to share. The opposite of
psychological safety would be a learning environment where
there was fear about looking bad, anxiety about perfection,
fear of admitting mistakes, blame-setting when things go

wrong, conformity in viewpoints, and even group-think
because respectful dissident voices are not expressed.
Cultivating 
psychological 
safety 
could 
start 
with
establishing very clear expectations for how people will
behave in the virtual training environment. For example, at the
outset of training, you might say something like,
I realize most people strive to look good in front of other
people, including our managers and colleagues. But in
this learning space, the biggest growth comes from
making mistakes. We learn the most when we make them,
and they help us improve. You are not here to impress
me. You’re here to learn. So, for the sake of your own
professional development, speak up when you have an
insight, speak up when you need help, and speak up when
you have an idea to share. It’s up to all of us to embrace
everyone’s contributions with interest and respect. We are
all here for the same purpose—to learn. So let’s share this
journey together and make it a safe space for everyone.
This could also mean weighing leadership’s attendance in
the virtual training carefully. If a senior leader, director, or
manager wishes to join, it might be better for them to share
how the training ties into their strategic objectives at the
opening but then leave as the training moves on. Sometimes
people are uncomfortable speaking and sharing freely if their
supervisors are present. You can always circle back to
leadership after the virtual training has ended.
Cultivating an environment where learners are not afraid of
being embarrassed, judged, criticized, or singled out is an
important component of establishing a productive virtual
learning environment. And it is an ongoing process. As Britt
Andreatta (2018) explains, “Be aware that your words and
actions have an impact on others. Think about how you create
psychological safety for others and how you earn their trust.
These 
moments 
are 
easily 
harmed 
by 
unintentional
insensitivity that does more damage than many people
realize.”
Encourage Different Perspectives

How can we cultivate psychological safety in virtual training?
Through our words, tone, and behavior. We want to lead the
effort to create a space where we explicitly set the expectation
that we want to hear from all voices and that all voices matter.
We set the stage for this in writing, with our netiquette slide at
the beginning; we reinforce this by saying it verbally; and
when learners contribute comments, we always affirm and
appreciate their efforts, demonstrating this principle with our
behavior. We must not ignore comments or cut people off or
dismiss a comment as irrelevant. Instead, we must listen
intently to what they say and follow-up or even dig deeper into
their comments to learn more and recognize their
contributions. Edmonson (2020) even recommends using
open-ended questions like “What are we missing?” “Who has
a different perspective?” or “What might happen if … ?”
These questions positively encourage different perspectives in
a healthy way. This is because “disagreement and dissent are
signs of healthy conflict” (Edmondson 2020). Other questions
I’ve used in virtual training classes include “What might be an
example of this?” “Tell me more,” and “Help me understand
why …”
Leverage Virtual Tools to Foster Psychological
Safety
There are specific virtual training platform tools you can use
to support psychological safety, which we’ll explore in greater
depth in chapter 7. For now, you can strategically use features
like small breakout groups or anonymous tools to break the ice
and provide a safer space to open up at first.
Learners feel more comfortable sharing in a smaller group
and are more likely to voice ideas that can later be raised to the
group at large during the debriefing. These ideas otherwise
might go unspoken in the large group dynamic because in a
larger the group, there is a smaller percentage of active
participants. With smaller groups, we are more likely to hear
from everyone. Working on specific assignments in small
groups provides a psychologically safe space to build
relationships and test out ideas first, which makes it easier for

participants to share later with a large group (Edmondson and
Daley 2020).
You can also leverage anonymous tools to support
psychological safety. For example, I have observed that my
learners participate more when we use the whiteboard if it is
anonymous. I remind them of this out loud as well. Contrast
this with chat and raising your virtual hand or talking out loud,
where everyone can see who said and did what. (Note that
many platforms, like Zoom, now reveal your names when you
use the whiteboard, so turn off this feature is you want to
leverage anonymity.)
Other anonymous tools include polling. Polling can be
leveraged to read the room or take the temperature on a topic
among learners. Afterward, people are more likely to speak up
to support why they voted the way they did once they see
where they range in terms of the majority and minority. There
are fewer unknown variables once the poll results are
broadcast, so it feels like a safer space to share why you voted
how you did depending on how the group at-large voted and
whether you were an outlier. As Amy Edmondson and Gene
Daley (2020) report, “Anonymous polls make it easy to
express an opinion without fear of being singled out.”
Model Vulnerability
Mistakes and failures are how we learn. Yet we have been
conditioned by some of our cultures to always look good in
front of others and especially those in higher positions of
authority, such as an instructor. As virtual facilitators we are
leaders and we need to set the tone that vulnerability is OK. As
Britt Andreatta (2018) articulates, we need to model the
characteristics that help shape psychological safety by
“proactively inviting input through questions that broaden and
deepen the discussion … Celebrate failures as learning.”
One way is to use vulnerable phrases that you then hope
learners will reciprocate. A facilitator might say, “I need your
help,” or “I’ve listed some that I could think of on this slide,
but what other ones can you think of? I’d love to hear your
input,” or “I want to hear about your biggest challenges when

you …” This way, virtual facilitators model the tough topics
and demonstrate they can be talked about. Learners, in turn,
mirror that behavior.
Whether a virtual training session feels rewarding or
punitive ultimately influences whether learners participate and
how they interact with each other and with their facilitator.
Think about a meeting where a dictatorial boss openly
chastises or threatens to fire anyone who disagrees with their
ideas. This hostile work environment inspires dysfunction
because it creates a punitive environment for employees who
share real ideas, and they are only rewarded for compliance.
Although this example is harsh, it also illustrates the power of
the leader. As leaders in virtual training, the facilitator and
producer must own and share the responsibility of ensuring
participants feel welcomed, at ease, psychologically safe, and
valued in virtual training sessions.
PRO TIP 18
Cultivate psychological safety during virtual
training by creating a safe space for learners to
take interpersonal risks and make mistakes without
fear of criticism, shame, or embarrassment from the
facilitator or other learners.
Affirm and Reward Learners: “I See You—I
Want to Hear From You”
In addition to asking probing, open-ended questions, we also
want to affirm learners’ contributions. Media mogul Oprah
Winfrey has shared many times through various media that
after 25 years of interviewing thousands of people on the
Oprah Winfrey Show, there was one important takeaway that
stood out from everything else: Everyone has a need to be seen
and heard; in essence, we all matter because we do. This
principle resonates deeply with me as a virtual trainer and
facilitator. Our learners want to be seen and heard too. We
have discussed welcoming learners, calling out their responses
when they are on target, seeing them as individuals, and
facilitating 
learner-to-learner 
and 
learner-to-facilitator

connections, but we also want to recognize their contributions
—the last C in the 5 Cs Pyramid.
How do we recognize learners’ contributions? By what we
pay attention to and what we say and do. If learners say
something out loud and we say nothing afterward, they will
likely not speak again. Even a “Yeah,” “That’s right,” “You’re
on the right track,” or “Couldn’t have said it better myself” are
verbal confirmations for affirmation and reward. Learners look
to you as the authority in the virtual space and on the subject
matter. It is rewarding when you authentically compliment
them. As facilitators, we can elevate learners’ self-esteem and
confidence to become their best selves (Biech 2017).
Nonverbal communication can also go a long way to show
affirmation. For example, when learners see their facilitator
smiling (or other people smiling at them), it is rewarding to the
brain. As you engage in discussions with them, make sure you
genuinely provide a compliment when warranted (such as
“That’s a really great point,” “Well said,” or “Excellent
work”).
You can also work to build on learners’ contributions as a
way of affirming them verbally. This demonstrates that their
comment was insightful enough to spend a bit more time on it;
for example, “Let’s see if we can build on that; Joe what do
you think,” “Where could we take that from here?” or “That’s
a really interesting point. Tell me more about how you think
that might work?” Ensuring your verbal tone demonstrates
how pleased you are when learners demonstrate a new skill or
knowledge in what you’re training is rewarding too.
If you provide affirmation and rewards as learners begin to
contribute, you will see their participation grow. However, it
might not always be prudent to call out every single
contribution, such as in the chat. A novice facilitator might
say, “The chat is blowing up. People seem to have lots of
questions about this,” and then proceed to read every comment
aloud verbatim. Intermediate facilitators, on the other hand,
can be mindful of how to leverage these contributions in a way
that doesn’t overload participants or take too long. Remember,
chat responses are visible for all to read in the session. You
can sort through the chat strategically and highlight a few that

are on target or that you wish to comment on later. You will
experience some cognitive overload as a facilitator at some
point because you are advancing slides, speaking, watching
chat, reading chat, and deciding to highlight a few—all at the
same time. If this becomes too much for you, enlist the help of
your producer. For example, you might say “Cheryl, what are
some of the posts we’re seeing in chat so far?”
It’s always helpful to learners when you affirm their
contributions and participation aloud, but don’t overdo it.
What gets rewarded, gets repeated.
Summary
Overall, our goal is to cultivate a welcoming environment
where all learners feel seen, heard, supported, valued, and
respected. As author Elaine Biech (2017) writes, “Create a
learning environment of trust and respect.” To build a trusting
environment, it is up to the facilitator to be authentic, genuine,
and a present listener; to be respectful in comments, have your
learners’ best interest at heart, and care about their journeys;
and to model mutual respect. Ultimately, you shape the
environment that influences the virtual learners’ experiences.
As we have explored, there are many strategies you can use
to create a respectful online environment. These environments
become the wrapper that influences everything that happens
within. By laying out a welcome mat in a variety of ways pre-
session, 
leading 
the 
sessions 
with 
enthusiasm 
and
personalization, and nurturing psychological safety, you can
cultivate a successful learning environment. This way learners
are comfortable sharing and contributing without fear of being
judged or embarrassed.
Not only is it important to build a supportive learning
environment, you also need to be expertly skilled in virtual
facilitation. This is because virtual learning environments
require an expanded skill set from traditional classroom
facilitation. In the next chapter, we’ll uncover the secrets to
successful online facilitation!

Pro Tips for Practicing Your
Environment Shaping Skills
TIP
10
Build community with connecting activities (even brief ones) to
foster social learning and help learners discover commonality
with one another.
TIP
11
Reference the 5 Cs Pyramid to guide your empathic
responses to virtual learners as they first acclimate.
TIP
12
Welcome participants via multiple touchpoints in multiple
ways.
TIP
13
Continually incentivize and reward active participation from
learners.
TIP
14
Proactively minimize potential distractions and interruptions to
promote learning.
TIP
15
Build connection with personalization, calling learners by their
first names throughout and weaving their names into
customized examples to grab learner attention.
TIP
16
Communicate netiquette expectations at the outset and
reinforce them throughout if needed.
TIP
17
Include brief, to-the-point introductions for initial connection
through chat, breakouts, whiteboard activities, or even verbal
introductions when class size is small.
TIP
18
Cultivate psychological safety during virtual training by
creating a safe space for learners to take interpersonal risks
and make mistakes without fear of criticism, shame, or
embarrassment from the facilitator or other learners.

“Eventually, an experienced virtual facilitator can gather
feedback from an audience and get a sense of the ‘pulse’ of the
room with as much accuracy as most classroom facilitators.”
—Darlene Christopher, author, The Successful Virtual
Classroom

Applying the Secrets of
Effective Online Facilitation
A seasoned technical trainer in the medical field was
participating in one of my Train-the-Virtual-Trainer classes to
further develop her facilitation skills. Although a very
experienced in-person trainer, she was new to virtual training.
As one of the assignments for this class, participants were
required to select a training topic from their profession and
facilitate a teach-back via a virtual training platform.
Participants were also required to incorporate a few virtual
tools into their learning activity, and be prepared to explain
their rationale for why those tools supported their learning
objectives. After finishing her teach-back to a small group of
mock learners, I asked, “How did that go for you?” Her reply
was telling. She let out an exhausted sigh and said, “There’s a
lot going on.”
Indeed, virtual facilitation has many moving parts, and
perhaps one of the biggest challenges to doing it well is
managing everything all at once. Her honest assessment
highlights the inherent complexity, even for the seasoned
practitioner. Online facilitation can be a perfect storm of
managing 
technical 
surprises, 
virtual 
tools, 
learner
participation, instructional content, and more. The online
format has a different feel, interpersonal dynamic, less
available sensory input, and many more distractions. There is
no denying that to keep things running smoothly, facilitators in
online synchronous environments require a high level of
knowledge and skill—and, ideally, a producer to assist you,
which we will discuss later in this chapter.

The good news is virtual facilitation is a skill. Because of
this, you can improve both your proficiency and comfort level
through rehearsal and repetition. Even time spent shadowing a
seasoned facilitator as a mentor or coach can be invaluable.
Over time, you can become adept at managing the moving
parts. The more experience you gain, the more automated
some of the facilitation and engagement tasks become. And
the more automated some tasks become, the easier it is to
manage the different elements.
When I was helping teach a teenager in our family how to
drive, I thought I was being helpful by pointing out things
while they drove. For example, I suggested when to apply the
brakes, where to come to a full stop at an intersection, and
how to pass cars parked along the roadside. By the time we
fully stopped at an intersection, the learning driver’s comment
to me was “I didn’t hear a word you said.” In that moment, I
was reminded that new skills as demanding as driving require
a novice’s complete mental attention. Here the pupil became
my teacher. Going forward, I offered verbal comments only
when we were pulled over or parked. Eventually, as their
driving proficiency improved, I observed some of those tasks
becoming more automated. This allowed for more verbal
conversation and processing while driving, which only
continued to grow with experience.
This story offers valuable lessons for virtual facilitation as
well. For novice facilitators, this role can require all your
energy and full attention. You can easily experience cognitive
overload and be overwhelmed by the sheer number of
concurrent activities to manage. However, the more familiar
you become with managing the platform, tools, and tasks
through preparation, repetition, and experience, some of these
tasks—like remembering to frequently scan chat throughout
the session—will become more automated.
Fortunately, you can carry over some of your in-person
facilitation skills too. For example, online facilitators still need
to ask good questions to gauge where a group is, dig deeper
with follow-up prompts when learners share, ensure everyone
has the opportunity to contribute, and provide clear transitions
between sub-topics. However, there are also skills unique to

virtual facilitation. As virtual training expert Jennifer
Hofmann 
(2019) 
affirms, 
“Even 
seasoned 
traditional
classroom facilitators need to build their skills to be successful
in the virtual classroom. Your new skill set will include new
tricks that build upon your existing facilitation toolset.” These
special skills are the focus of this chapter.
When I ask clients what they most want to learn about live
online learning, the most common response is, “How can I
engage virtual participants?” Naturally, this is very important,
but we also need to remember that there is a marketable
difference between learners clicking for the sake of clicking
and engagement. It is not physical busyness like learners
voting in frequent polls. Engagement means learners are
actively investing themselves both emotionally and mentally
in what they are doing. Ruth Clark (2020) notes that
“engagement is essential, but it is psychological engagement
rather than physical engagement that counts.” To aid learning,
we want learners deeply invested emotionally and cognitively.
To expand this concept further, we strive to engage learners
with all four learning dimensions as discussed in chapter 2;
that is, cognitively, emotionally, socially, and behaviorally.
And because we design learning experiences, we also lead
them as learning experience facilitators.
One of the best ways to deeply engage participants
throughout virtual training is to guide them to be co-creators
of their own learning. To do this, we need to fully develop our
capability in the area of online facilitation. Let’s explore the
secrets to effective online facilitation now, so you can facilitate
your virtual sessions with aplomb.
THE BIG IDEA
Skilled virtual facilitators guide learners to be co-
creators of their own learning.
Navigating the Black Hole
When the telephone was first patented in 1876, the technology
was so new that when the phone rang and people answered,
nobody said anything. There was only silence on both ends.

With all visual cues removed, it is possible they just didn’t
know what to say, or, more importantly, when to say it. Hard
to imagine, right? This seems humorous now, because
answering a phone and saying hello is so automatic. And, of
course, we now have advanced technology that lets us know
exactly who is calling. Back then, however, it must have felt a
bit like being in a black hole.
It was Thomas Edison who eventually urged people to say
“hello” when answering a telephone, which was the first time
this word became equivalent to “hi” (Krulwich 2011). This
way both parties knew when the conversation should begin.
Scottish-born inventor Alexander Graham Bell—Edison’s
rival—patented the first working telephone and thought people
should say “ahoy” when answering instead (Krulwich 2011).
Ironically, Bell refused telephone installation in his own study
because he felt it was an intrusion from the outside world and
would distract him from his professional work (MacLeod
1999). Flash forward to our modern era where telephony and
electronic voice transmission are integral to professional work.
If only Edison and Bell could observe the world at work
today!
If we apply this black hole metaphor to live online training,
there are certainly times when learners might feel like they are
in a bit of a black hole. This is especially true when facilitators
and co-participants are not on camera. With only audio cues
and a visible onscreen platform, learners lack sensory cues to
which we are normally accustomed. In physical environments,
we rely on these cues to help us fully interpret our
surroundings. So, there are specific techniques you can apply
to help learners adjust to the virtual classroom. In this chapter
we’ll look at five techniques to aid learning:
1. Verbalize the unseen.
2. Leverage announced silence.
3. Wait before filling uncomfortable silences.
4. Apply the pausing principle.
5. Employ the testing effect.

Verbalize the Unseen
In traditional classroom training, longer periods of unexpected
silence are acceptable because they can still be visually
understood and interpreted by physically present learners. For
example, in-room participants see for themselves what is
happening as a facilitator searches for supplies in the front of
the room, switches from slides to video, troubleshoots a laser
pointer, or pauses to connect to a SMART Board. However, in
virtual training facilitators may not realize when they
inadvertently create periods of unannounced, extended silence
when no one can see what they’re doing.
Without access to visual cues online, learners do not know
what is happening. If there are unannounced pregnant pauses,
they may wonder if they lost audio, the facilitator’s audio
dropped, the facilitator accidentally muted themselves,
something is wrong with the connection, or the platform is
experiencing technical issues. The reality is the facilitator may
simply be performing an unseen task. For example, they might
be glancing at the LMS roster to compare names with
everyone listed in the participant panel, or trying to locate a
second PowerPoint deck that wasn’t where they thought it
was, or relocating chat because it was undocked and
disappeared when they closed something else.
Not knowing what is happening or why it is taking so long
not only interrupts the flow and cadence but calls attention
away from content. In some cases, it can even create learner
anxiety. As facilitators, we need to minimize anxiety to
support learning. According to educational neuroscientist Janet
Zadina (2014), “Anxiety has a negative impact on thinking
and higher-order executive functions … we must take
measures to reduce anxiety.” When individuals become
anxious or their fight-or-flight response is triggered, blood and
resources are diverted away from the brain to extremities like
hands and feet. This equips people to fight (hands) and run
away from danger (feet). So, the ability to think well, make
decisions, and acquire new knowledge takes a hit for a higher
purpose—survival. Clearly, virtual classes are not dangerous
or life threatening, but our body’s physiological reaction to

stress is the same and can trigger panic and anxiety. The
bottom line is that anxiety and learning do not mix, and feeling
like you’re in a black hole does not help. So, what can
facilitators do?
One technique is to verbalize what learners cannot see. I call
this “talking your task.” This means commenting aloud during
pregnant pauses to briefly explain the reason. Do this when
you need to attend to something that takes longer than it
should. Here are a few examples of talking your task:
• “OK, I’m bringing up the PDF here.”
• “Just one moment please, while I open the whiteboard for
us. You’ll see it shortly.”
• “I’m switching over to my next slide deck. Please go
ahead and read the scenario on page 12 of your digital
participant guide and then we’ll take a look at the slides
for this next section.”
• “I just had a window close on me. It’ll be just one moment
here while I bring this back. Appreciate your patience.”
• “Let’s clear these annotations before we move on … there
we are.”
Making the invisible audible with professionalism and
brevity keeps learners connected and informed. These auditory
cues replace lost visual cues. Most importantly, when you talk
your task learners are not left in the lurch wondering whether
something went wrong. You can liken this to when you
schedule a medical appointment via phone that is not a video
call. If you call and request a preferred date for a medical
appointment with a receptionist, but only hear silence, you
wonder if the scheduler even heard you. If, however, the
receptionist says, “I really appreciate your patience. Our
system is running a bit slower today … after all, it’s Monday!
It’ll be just another minute please,” you’ll settle in knowing all
is well. The reason is because now you are informed. You
received verbal confirmation as a replacement for the absence
of visual confirmation. As facilitators, we want to do the same
for our learners at key junctures.

We may not think to narrate through the silence, because we
know what is happening. It’s easy to get locked into our own
insular perspective. However, in these unseen moments,
learners may not understand what is happening, what just
happened, or what is about to happen. They are left to wait and
wonder, and perhaps even become anxious or think something
went wrong. It’s important to note this absolutely does not
mean to share everything ad nauseam. Some things are best
kept behind the curtain. However, you can provide just enough
to give the rationale for the current silence and to assure them
all is well. Intermediate and advanced-level facilitators lead
the effort to professionally verbalize what participants cannot
see. As part of our job, we bring them along every step of the
way.
PRO TIP 19
Make the invisible audible by talking your task.
Let’s examine another technique that is part of
verbalizing the unseen. This strategic practice can be used to
influence learners when we need to persuade them to do
something different or take new action in their workplace. In
this technique, facilitators speculate what learners’ objections
might be, acknowledge those objections aloud, and then
address them. The key is to bring up those potential objections
at the time you think learners might be thinking them. From
there, you address the concern. An example of this might be if
you said, “Some of you are probably wondering how this new
project management system we’re learning to use today is
going to make the process more efficient.” Although you
cannot hear learners’ thoughts—except for what they share in
chat—you can still guess what their objections, reactions, or
questions might be.
Say, for example, you are training leaders virtually on
different types of behavioral styles. You explain that they will
be assessing the behavioral styles of their direct reports, so
they can adapt their own styles to their employees’ preferred
styles when they work with them. In this context, let’s look at
an example where you might explore potential objections. You
might say something like, “Now some of you are thinking why

should I have to change my preferred style when I work with
my direct reports? Isn’t that the point of having a variety of
styles?” When a facilitator speaks aloud what a learner was
just thinking, it can immediately grab their attention. Next,
you move ahead to address their concern. You might say,
“Those are legitimate questions. As leaders, it’s our job to
inspire and bring out the best in our employees. We adapt our
style to theirs so we can lead them more effectively.”
I use this technique when internal managers or an external
client contact lets me know before a virtual training that there
may be resistance with a few participants about moving to a
new process or embracing change in the workplace. If you
acknowledge aloud some potential objections they’re thinking,
it can be very powerful. This is also an attention-getting
technique. There’s an element of surprise at play as they
wonder how you knew what they were thinking. Guaranteed,
they’re listening to the next thing you say.
PRO TIP 20
Acknowledge and address potential learner
objections aloud at the time they might be thinking
them.
Leverage “Announced Silence” to Aid
Learning
If you are familiar with radio broadcasting, you know that
silence during a broadcast is called dead air. In the radio
industry, dead air is never good. Some professionals suggest
the same is true for virtual training. They advocate virtual
facilitators avoid silence at all costs. However, I see this quite
differently.
I believe silence can be used to aid learning. In the previous
section, we explored how unannounced extended silence is
problematic unless we make the invisible audible. Otherwise,
learners will be left in the lurch and often automatically
assume something is wrong. Let’s now look at how announced
silence can be leveraged to aid live online learning.

Silence can be used strategically if certain boundaries are in
place. For example, participants need to know it’s coming,
what their task is during the silence, and how long it will last.
By providing advance warning about silence, learners are
assured everything is OK. Most importantly, you give learners
time to think without a competing voice in the background.
This way, they can complete reflections or other thinking tasks
in quiet. This is what I call “announced silence.” It allows
space for cognitive processing and can promote deeper
learning. You simply need to provide fair warning.
According to cognitive load theory and evidence-based
design, it’s more effective for trainers to initially reveal a
complex visual, pause, and let participants process it. This
helps learners create a mental framework that your verbal
commentary will fill in later. If you show learners a complex
visual, it is important to pause and allow them to briefly digest
the visual first before you explain it (Schnotz 2014).
Otherwise, it can be too challenging for them to listen to your
commentary and study a complicated visual at the same time.
It also helps reduce cogitative load. Once you start explaining
it, focus first on the visual’s structural elements. From there,
gradually delve into its more detailed aspects. In this way, you
create space for learners to process, focus, and think without
the distraction of a facilitator’s voice in the background. For
example, you might say aloud, “I’ll be quiet for the next few
minute while you study this diagram. When we come back
together, let me know how you think it could be improved by
applying the principles we’ve discussed.”
When you ask thoughtful questions for participants to
respond to in chat, you also might say, “I’ll be silent for a bit
here while you think and respond to that question.” As the
axiom goes, silence can be golden. Intermediate and
advanced-level facilitators leverage announced silence with
parameters. It’s a powerful tool. Use announced silence to
promote deeper learning when participants are:
• Actively engaged in thinking about a response (this can be
individual prep time before entering a breakout activity)

• Reviewing an assignment’s instructions in the participant
guide
• Looking at a complex visual for the first time
• Viewing a slide that is more text-heavy that they can read
on their own
• Reflecting on something they’ve learned by typing
responses in a digital participant workbook
• Filling out an action plan
• Thinking about a rhetorical or open-ended question you’ve
posed
• Working independently on a task or exercise
• Completing their digital evaluation in class
One of the virtual training programs my company offers is
how to design effective visuals for deeper learning. In this
class, we explore the pillars of good visual design. When some
virtual platforms did not yet support shared whiteboards, we
used to show learners an example slide with bulleted content
and ask them to complete a real-time drawing assignment to
find a more effective way to illustrate the content. By either
using a digital pen and tablet or a pen and paper in their
remote locations, they drew visuals that more appropriately
depicted the sample content. This was an opportunity for
learners to individually practice and apply the visual design
principles we had just discussed. I asked them to email their
drawings using their smartphones or tablets and to let me
know whether I had their permission to share a few of them
with the rest of the class. During a break, I reviewed them and
pulled a few examples to share when the class at large
reconvened. This way, we could discuss them and use their
work to reinforce key learning points.
To set up this independent drawing exercise, I told them: “I
will be silent for several minutes while you work on this. Then
we’ll come together again and talk about your design process
and your rationale for depicting this content differently.” It’s
also important to communicate that if participants have
questions while they work, they can privately let you know in

chat. The point here is to give them quiet space to think. By
giving learners silence to think, reflect, and work, you enhance
their ability to practice and apply what they’re learning.
Here are some things facilitators can do during silence while
participants work independently:
• Keep an eye on chat in case participants have individual
questions that come up while they’re working.
• Mute yourself to remove any background noise from your
environment.
• Review the roster names to pre-select a few participants
I’ve seen demonstrate leadership so far who I think would
be a strong facilitator for an upcoming breakout. Before
the breakout, I always ask those individuals if they would
be willing to lead, and they almost always respond “yes.”
• Review notes made on the roster about who made some
“golden nugget” comments or insights. I like to do this so
it’s fresh in my mind and I can tie back to their
contributions again later when it makes sense in the
content.
• Scroll up and review chat comments from the virtual
training session so far.
• Chat privately with your producer about how it’s going, if
they need anything or if there’s anything they need you to
know (like they need to leave for a bit and be right back,
or if there were any critical questions you missed in the
chat).
• Check the time estimates on your facilitator guide to
determine if you’re behind, ahead, or on schedule. This
helps me determine whether I need to take out a section,
speed up a little bit, or slow down and take more time.
• Review speaking notes to see if you left out anything
critical so far that you could bring in later, and if there’s
an opportunity to do so with impact.
• Get a drink of water.

• Take a standing break and move around to increase
circulation and keep energy levels heightened.
Note, too, that silence should be used judiciously. This is
not a technique to overuse as it can weaken its effect. Overall,
strategically leverage announced silence for deep-thinking
work and be sure to always prepare learners for it ahead of
time.
PRO TIP 21
Use announced silence to give learners brief
spaces to complete activities or study complex
visuals, and communicate beforehand when, why, and
how long you’ll be silent.
Wait Before Filling Uncomfortable Silences
It’s fine to admit feeling uncomfortable during prolonged
silences, announced or not. However, when you pose
questions and nobody speaks at first, remember it always takes
longer for the first person to share. If you wait long enough,
someone will usually step up to fill the void. Do your best to
hold your tongue (yes, it’s a trainer’s occupational hazard to
fill silence with talking). Or consider placing yourself on mute
for the moment.
In the late 1960s, Mary Budd Rowe (1986) discovered an
instructional variable referred to as “wait-time.” She found
that while teachers tended to wait only one second after posing
a question to learners, waiting up to five seconds was optimal
instead. When educators and virtual trainers apply this wait-
time principle, it can transform virtual class discussions
because it gives learners increased thinking time and reflection
for active learning. Although this study was conducted in-
person and with younger learners, it still has application for
online adult learners. By simply waiting longer (five to six
seconds instead of one to two seconds), we afford learners the
opportunity to think, reflect, process, and then respond. Hold
your tongue before quickly moving on or answering your own
questions aloud. Give learners a bit more time to think and
respond.

Apply the Pausing Principle
We’ve discussed announced silence and the wait-time
principle, but what about using pausing in general as an active
learning strategy? Strategic pausing is also deep seeded in
evidence-based research. It is referred to as the “pausing
principle,” and has been well documented in educational
research since the 1980s (Di Vesta and Smith 1979). What is
most important about this active learning strategy is that
pressing pause, opens space for learners to think, reflect, and
refocus their attention. If you use the right type of pausing
activities, you can increase learner engagement and retention.
Gail Taylor Rice recommends regularly asking learners to look
back at what they’ve learned and apply it to their specific
contexts. For example, a closing pause activity gives learners
time to process what they’ve learned and decide how they will
use the content (Rice 2018). At the end of my virtual training
classes, I ask learners to pause and identify one takeaway they
can apply as a next step based on their role, and then type it
anonymously on the whiteboard. This way, they’re thinking
about it and sharing it with others.
There are a variety of activities and techniques you can use
during pauses to enhance learning. One technique is to ask
questions during the pause. For example, you can pause to ask
learners a difficult, probing question, which allows you to
check for understanding. You can also pause to ask learners to
think about how they might apply what they just learned or
discuss content. Pausing occasionally to ask a question triggers
learners to actively think, not tune out. For example, you
might say, “Let me know in chat or feel free to come off mute
to let us know how you can apply these negotiation skills in
your internal customer meetings.” Strategically weave in
questions where it makes sense to stop and pause to reflect or
interject curiosity. This not only creates a space for learners to
find ways to relate to the content, but it’s also an opportunity
to practice recalling the information. Of course, if learners
have questions at any time during the session, you want to stop
and at least briefly address them, even if you elaborate on it
more later, because when they ask the question is when they
care most about the answer.

When I train virtually, I prefer to plan for multiple pause
points throughout. This is an opportunity to welcome
questions, insights, and additional comments. A powerful tool
at your disposal here is the open-ended question. As we’ve
discussed, it’s far better to lead with open-ended questions
than closed-ended questions. For example, you might ask
“What questions do you have at this point?” This opens up the
field more broadly and keeps the conversation on topic versus
asking “Do you have any questions?” A closed-end prompt is
limiting and can simply be answered with a yes or no.
In virtual training, you can also build in pauses to do more
than just open the floor for questions. Another way to look at
the pausing principle is that it can facilitate reflection time for
learners to think back about what was discussed. Amusingly, I
once attended a virtual session focused on the topic of
reflection. The speakers talked about how important it was and
how instructors should incorporate reflections into their online
training sessions. The irony was that the instructors never
initiated an opportunity for all of us to stop and reflect on
reflection during the virtual training session on reflection.
Easier said than done!
Watch for opportunities after meatier content sections or
breakouts to pause and reflect by giving learners writing,
thinking, discussion, or debriefing activities. Ideally, these
exercises can help wire their neural networks. If learners don’t
find course content naturally exciting, their body may not
signal their brain to be alert and devote their full attention to it.
However, as educational neuroscientist Janet Zadina (2014)
explains, learners can also wire their brain’s neural networks
by doing something with the content, such as when learners
“think about it, talk about it, read about it, or use it.”
Employ the Testing Effect
Another facilitation technique you can use to aid learning is to
pause and quiz learners with polling questions. Interestingly,
the beneficial effects of incorporating polling questions have
more to do with the pausing principle than with the polls. By
actively pausing, you create a buffer space for learners to

process, review, and recall. It is this underlying method of
pausing or stopping that is responsible for aiding learning
because learners are thinking deeply.
This active recall to aid learning is called the testing effect.
“A wealth of empirical research has found that the retention of
studied material can be enhanced by testing” (Kang,
McDermott, and Roediger 2007). Simply, the testing effect
shows that when learners are asked questions about the
material covered and then receive immediate corrective
feedback, it can make a significant difference in learning and
memory. The point here is that learners are practicing recall in
their neural networks and solidifying those paths in their brain.
This is analogous to pioneering a hiking trail. The more often
you hike on the trail, the more trodden the trail becomes. The
more you practice recalling something in your brain, the more
you wire that recall path.
One of my learners in a virtual training class on virtual
training conducted a teach-back where she taught mock
learners how to read sonograms. Afterward, she used polls to
quiz us on the content. If our answers were not correct, she
immediately provided corrective feedback in the moment. As a
result, we learned more during the polling because it employed
recall and we received immediate, corrective feedback. The
more learners practice recall, the better able they’ll be able to
recall in the future.
By using natural or planned pauses to test for knowledge,
you’re turning what can be seen as dead time or the black hole
of silence into deep learning opportunities.
Creating a Conversational Space
In chapter 3, we explored how virtual learners can feel like
they’re entering someone’s home as a guest at the beginning of
a session. Learners understand they were the invitee, not the
inviter. But what if they knew they were more than guests?
What if we invite them to become co-creators of their own
learning? In part, this means we talk less and allow them to
talk more. It means releasing some control to ask where they
would like to go next. It means empowering them by reducing

our spotlight. Creating a space where all in attendance are on
equal footing, equally respected, and all invited to contribute
begins with establishing a safe, co-owned conversational
space. As virtual facilitators, we start where learners are and
bring them along from there.
Make the Virtual Space Inclusive to All
Online, both public and private spaces exist. Private
messaging in chat is an example of private space because a
single message is intentionally directed to one person by
selecting their name only. This can be useful when a learner
wishes to direct a message to a facilitator in private, the
facilitator wishes to return a message to a learner in private, or
when a producer and facilitator need to send messages back
and forth to each other. For example, some of my producers
post me private messages about time checks, such as when we
are 10 minutes away from ending time. This message is for my
eyes only, so we don’t distract learners. Another example of
private space is when learners enter individual breakouts
where they may be tasked with working on a small sub-project
alone, or when two people are in a breakout together and able
to share a private conversation.
Public space, then, exists any time the group at large is live
together. It is when comments are shared that all can hear or
see. For example, this could be through group chat, a
whiteboard activity, or coming off mute and speaking aloud.
And in this public space, ensuring everyone feels included and
able to contribute to the conversation is a key virtual
facilitation skill. Remember, any pre-discussions before class
begins can set the tone for your virtual training class.
One context where public space can inadvertently turn into
private space is during the pre-session welcome. If you engage
in conversation with people when they first join and before
class begins, be wary of the sole participant who may
dominate the space and use it for private conversation. Novice
facilitators might allow whatever conversation happens to
unfold as-is. However, intermediate or advanced facilitators
are strategically mindful of creating a space that welcomes all,

and do not allow one learner to dominate the conversation, get
too in the weeds about personal items, or speak exclusively to
a producer or trainer without realizing the broader audience
listening as well.
As session leader, you or your producer can intervene to
keep the public space public. One way is by inviting others
into the conversation. For example, if one person is talking
about the virtual platform they use for training and not
allowing anyone else to speak, you might ask, “Josie,
Shameka, and Matthew, what platforms do each of your
organizations use?” This way you direct targeted questions to
other participants. What is the experience for other learners if
one participant monopolizes the conversation before virtual
training begins? As online facilitators, we need to intervene to
create a conversational space conducive for all.
Another way of ensuring all feel respected and comfortable
is inviting them to include their gender pronouns after their
typed name. This can display near their live video feed if the
platform allows the option to rename or edit—for example,
“Seth Smith (he/him/his).” If they are comfortable sharing this
information, it can be helpful for facilitators. In past years, I
made the mistake of accidentally assuming a masculine-
identifying learner’s name was feminine (they were not on
video and had not come off mute yet); thankfully, he came off
mute to correct me, which I was grateful for and naturally
apologized for, while making a careful note to myself. So, be
respectful by noting participants’ pronouns, calling learners by
their first names if that’s the convention for their culture and
organization, and using a gender-neutral group greeting like
“everyone” when addressing the crowd (rather than “ladies
and gentlemen” or “guys”).
Part of skilled facilitation also requires ensuring all
participants are learning and have an opportunity to be
included. If one learner begins to overrun a conversation, steer
the conversation off point, or share comments that are too
personal or irrelevant to the group at large, it is your
responsibility as the facilitator to get the conversation back on
track. This can be done with a paired response that includes a
polite closing prompt and then a question to transition to the

group. For example, you might say “Sounds like you’ll be
very busy. That’s a great application example. Thanks, Leita.
OK, let’s hear from someone else. Qiang, how do you think
you could apply this to your role?” In this example, the
facilitator’s response respectfully includes a reaction,
summary, and appreciation. This closes the original
conversation. Then the question prompt clears a path for
participation from others to keep the momentum going
forward.
You can also intentionally create a public conversational
space when a learner posts a message in chat to which you
respond aloud. As you scan the chat, you might laugh
agreeingly and say, “You are so right, Pablo!” and then move
on to discuss something else. However, remember this is a
public space. Now there are 19 other learners who are
wondering what was so funny about Pablo’s comment and
what was he so right about. Because of their natural curiosity,
they may shift their focus to chat. Then you’ll have
participants trying to scroll up and down the chat queue,
looking for Pablo’s name, only to discover he posted lots of
comments that day or there are multiple Pablos in the class. By
now, your learners have missed everything you might have
said for the last several minutes.
So, when you reference something in chat as facilitator, you
certainly do not need to read a post in its entirety or verbatim
unless it’s short, but do briefly summarize for the group at
large to bring everyone in on the comment. For example, a
facilitator might say, “Pablo says he’s used this attention getter
in some past presentations, and it works every time. You are so
right, Pablo!” Beginning with Pablo’s name grabs his
attention. It also grabs the attention of other learners because
they’re wondering if you’ll say their comment out loud too.
And it clarifies that the words coming next are not the
facilitator’s own words but from a learner. Treat public space
as a forum where all can be included and find a place in the
conversation.
PRO TIP 22

Treat virtual public space as a conversational space for
all.
Prime Learners for What Is Ahead With Verbal
Signposts
Did you ever play the game as a child where you had a
handkerchief around your eyes, and someone led you around a
living space to find hidden treasures? You may have tripped
over toys or stubbed your toes on furniture all because you
were motivated to discover the prizes on the obstacle course.
You likely performed better if you had a guide to navigate you,
perhaps someone who said, “Watch out for the couch on your
left” or “there’s a dog toy in front of your right foot.” These
signposts are helpful when you can’t rely on the sensory cues
you pick up yourself.
In the online space, learners have fewer sensory cues and
feel better if they receive guidance. This guidance might
consist of letting them know where they are headed, what’s
coming next, or what you’ll soon be asking them to do. Even
providing a heads-up that a potential quiz is coming can incent
some learners to pay closer attention. Verbal signposts can also
be used to call out the most important points. Here are some
examples:
• “In a few minutes, we’re going to work on independent
assignments.”
• “I’m going to ask each of you to share one thing in just a
bit.”
• “If there’s one thing you need to remember most, it’s this
…”
• “Later on, we’ll take a brief quiz on these principles to
check your knowledge.”
• “In a little bit, you’ll be asked to improve how this graph
displays.”
• “After we look at some non-examples, I’m going to call on
a few people to hear your thoughts about how to make
these more effective.”

• “As you watch this video, notice two things Fredrik does
that really make a difference in the conversation.”
• “In a moment I’m going to ask you to share one of your
takeaways from today.”
In your virtual training classes, calling on learners by name
is also a wonderful way to get their attention. Learners will
immediately sit up a little straighter when they hear their name
called. And guaranteed, you will have their undivided
attention for the next five to 10 minutes as well, because they
will be listening intently to see if you say their name again. If
you are going to call on learners though, I recommend letting
learners know up front you may call on them to provide
advance warning. In your netiquette at the beginning of
training, you can even warn learners you will be calling on
them at times, so they can prepare accordingly.
I also believe it’s helpful to give learners a heads-up that an
activity is coming where they may be called upon to share.
This allows them time to begin thinking about it. For example,
I might say, “A few slides from now, I’m going to ask
everyone to share one principle they will apply on their job
tomorrow and why. All of us will be typing these on the digital
whiteboard.” Again, this buys them some advance time to
think and prepare for what they might share, so you can
appropriately set them up for success and their responses will
be more thoughtful.
PRO TIP 23
Give learners a heads-up when they may be
called upon to share.
The Value of Instructional Clarity
Inevitably, once you place learners in breakouts, the first thing
they will say in their small group is, “What are we supposed to
do again?” This is not unique to online training. Even in
traditional classroom training, you must make sure you are
crystal clear about instructions and expectations for small-
group work. I often ask for a volunteer among online learners
to paraphrase back the instructions they heard before releasing

everyone into their small groups. This is a check to ensure
they are very clear on their group task.
Other ways you can clarify instructions include providing at
least one example of what you’re expecting and sometimes a
non-example. 
These 
examples 
can 
head 
off 
any
misunderstandings. I am continually surprised by people who
teach online, give an assignment, and never include an
example of what’s expected from learners’ work. Examples
not only equip your learners for success but are also part of
good communication and help to clarify the desired outcome.
One of my golden rules that has served me well in the
virtual space is to give instructions for more complicated
exercises three ways, three times. For example, with a
breakout activity, I might provide a visual anchor where
learners can read the assignment summary in text; second, I’ll
verbally explain it; and third, I’ll post a brief reminder in chat
or a post a link to their digital participant guide where the
instructions are. This way access to instructions is readily
available and there is plenty of opportunity to clarify
instructions before and during the exercise.
PRO TIP 24
Provide instructions three ways, three times for
more involved activities.
Empowering Learners
As skilled facilitators, we can use multiple techniques to
encourage, prompt, and empower learners. For example, you
might challenge them to lead discussion, identify and commit
to their own application of the training, require them to submit
and follow-through on an action plan, or give them difficult
decisions to make in scenario-based learning. All of these
activities can help empower learners.
As author and speaker Michael Bungay Stanier (2021) says,
the more learners grow in power, the more your power is
reduced. It’s about releasing command and control at pivotal
points for the benefit of learners within guided structure.
However, if we allow them to do whatever they like, it can

result in floundering. “We have a great deal of evidence
showing that pure discovery learning is both inefficient and
ineffective” (Clark 2020). According to evidence-based
research, guided instruction is needed to improve both
performance outcomes and learning outcomes. We can
empower them to make decisions within a guided structure.
Where you can provide the most impact is by modeling how
something should be done as well as providing feedback to
learners (Clark 2020). When I train participants on how to give
constructive feedback, I always ask for a volunteer to help me
role play. First, we demonstrate how not to give constructive
feedback. The participant has the easier role and usually goes
along with it and has a lot of fun. Then I ask for another
volunteer and together we model how to give constructive
feedback while the other learners watch us demonstrate the
principles we just discussed. Afterward, we debrief as a group
and discuss feedback. This sets learners up for greater success
because their next step is to practice it themselves in paired
breakouts. This modeling is what many trainers tend to leave
out before asking learners to practice something in small
breakout groups. So, we can empower learners to practice
what they’re learning by providing expert modeling
beforehand and feedback afterward.
What Gets Rewarded Gets Repeated: Spark
Discussion, Don’t Extinguish It
Another way to empower learners is to genuinely
acknowledge and affirm their contributions and build on them
when they engage with the content. This is because what gets
rewarded gets repeated. When we say “Claudia, that’s a really
great point! Have you also thought about …” it can motivate
participants to stay connected. As author Jennifer Hofmann
(2019) notes, “It feels great to answer a question correctly and
to receive positive feedback from facilitators and peers.”
This positive reinforcement can be very motivating.
However, praise must be genuine. When a comment is
disingenuous, people can tell. If a learner shares and then,
right afterward, the facilitator says, “Anyone else?” or

“Thanks for that” or “Thanks for sharing,” without any further
input, is the participant really motivated to share again? These
trite, generic phrases from the facilitator can come across as
rote, sterile, and distant. Better to dig deeper, ask follow-up
questions, offer a genuine compliment, or expand with an
additional comment. So, you might say their first name,
comment on what they said, and then expand on it a bit with a
follow-up. For example, “Ahh, yes, Amalia, that’s so
insightful. It’s those little things we do as leaders that really
make a difference, isn’t it? What do the rest of you think are
important leadership traits?” If a participant answers
incorrectly, provide correction in a non-punitive way. For
example, you might say, “Tell me more about how you arrived
at that,” or “You’re so close. Let’s unpack this a bit more.”
Even empathy statements can demonstrate you’re listening and
spark deeper conversation, such as “That must have been so
frustrating. How was it eventually resolved?”
In chat, for example, it can also be rewarding to call out the
first names of some participants and summarize their posts
briefly. However, be wary of being too deferential. You should
not read every comment from the chat aloud. That gets old
quickly. Learners can read too. Instead, choose three to five
posts that hit the mark or serve as great transitions or steer the
discussion in a fruitful direction. The point of reading a few
names and their posts aloud is to affirm participation, check
knowledge, reward effort, and allow space for participants to
be co-creators of the learning experience. If participants feel
rewarded, it encourages more of the same behavior.
PRO TIP 25
Genuinely affirm learners’ contributions aloud,
build on their responses, and where appropriate
dig deeper.
Connect Back to Learners’ Previous
Comments
Beginning facilitators may see chat comments and say “I see
the chat blowing up here,” or “Many of you are commenting
about XYZ.” Although this is a good starting point, facilitators

can expand on it even more. One advanced technique is to
continually refer to previous learners’ comments by drawing
connections as you go. Link previous comments to discussions
going forward where appropriate. By this, I don’t mean just
acknowledging the comment at the time it is shared by a
learner, but later and throughout the session, referring back to
something a learner said and referencing it again in context.
For example, “As Finn mentioned earlier, positional
intimidation can be an obstacle to communicating assertively.
What else might be an obstacle?”
To help you effectively bring back a learner’s comment,
keep a physical notebook nearby. There is so much happening
digitally in front of you, with many screens and many tools.
So, keep an analog paper pad and pen nearby to jot down a
running list of first names and what I call “gold nugget
comments.” Sometimes the quickest way to remember what
someone said is to glance down and see it on paper. I like to
keep a printed roster of all the names in my class, and when
someone shares a gold nugget, I write it next to their name to
remind me to reference it later. This way, you’ll be able to
quickly find it when your brain prompts you. These references
show your attentiveness, which subtly invites theirs,
communicates you care, builds rapport and trust, reinforces
content, rewards participation, and invites learners to co-create
and co-facilitate. They will feel proud that you highlighted and
tied back to something they said earlier and this can motivate
them to continue contributing in meaningful ways.
PRO TIP 26
Draw connections to learners’ previous comments
by referring to them throughout.
Allow for Learner Agency and Voice
Learner agency is when learners are given the space and
responsibility to make choices in a learning experience. They
have the freedom to take initiative and decide which of several
activity options interests them most. Although training can
sometimes feel like it’s being levied on you, ultimately you
have to choose whether you’ll learn (Cross 2007). Choice can

embolden learners by giving them confidence. Not only can it
create a deeper level of engagement with the subject matter,
but it can also fan the flame of intrinsic motivation. By
increasing learners’ choices and options, we increase intrinsic
motivation (Zuckerman et al. 1978). Optimizing learner
agency gives learners more investment, and when someone
places a stake in the ground figuratively, they become
naturally more vested.
In their book, Let Them Choose: Cafeteria Learning Style
for Adults, authors Jillian Douglas and Shannon McKenzie
propose a facilitation and design technique where trainers
allow participants to choose from among various activities and
options. Although there may be multiple learning activities
available, in the end, learners attain the same learning
objectives. “When learners are in charge of their own learning
and have the freedom to make their own choices (that is,
experiencing a greater sense of autonomy), it means that not
only can they do their jobs better (gaining competency and
moving toward mastery), but they also have the opportunity to
discover the intimate connection between their everyday tasks
and the company’s larger sense of purpose, mission, and
values (fostering a deeper sense of purpose)” (Douglas and
McKenzie 2016).
Learner agency also ties into self-determination theory
(SDT), which is one of the most influential frameworks for
motivation and emerged from the work of psychologist
Edward Deci (Miller 2014). According to professors Edward
Deci and Richard Ryan (2000), self-determination theory
posits three major areas of motivation for individuals:
competence, relatedness, and autonomy. “We strive to be good
at things, to develop bonds with other people, and to make our
own choices. People are the most intrinsically motivated and
experience the most growth in environments that support these
three basic needs” (Miller 2014).
With SDT, it’s also important to note that one of the best
ways to boost intrinsic motivation for virtual training is to
explain the rationale for why. For example, in chapter 3, we
discussed the importance of including the why in your pre-
communication messaging and at the beginning of training

classes. As a skilled virtual facilitator, you must continue
looking for ways to increase learner agency and build in
motivation, which is the emotional dimension of learning. In
addition to the emotional dimension, building competence ties
into the cognitive and behavioral dimensions of learning, and
relational bonds tie into the social dimension of learning.
This isn’t to say learning is all freeform, because you still
provide a structure in which participants make choices. One
example is to let learners choose how to communicate with
you. For example, after posing a thoughtful discussion
question, you might say, “You can either let us know in chat or
feel free to come off mute and share. Would love to hear from
you either way.” Most tend to respond in chat, but sometimes
you’ll get a few who prefer to speak aloud. The point is they
get to choose. It may seem like a minor point, but the more
ownership learners take, the more this can blossom for them.
Making their own decisions within the context of guided
structure can increase independence and co-ownership.
PRO TIP 27
Present multiple options to learners within a
guided structure.
There are many ways you can incorporate more choice and
learner agency into virtual training programs. For example,
when your training requires learners to do a teach-back or a
presentation, request they select the topic. As you explain
concepts, you can also give them license to select which sub-
topic they would like to discuss first. For example, you might
say, “We’ll be covering three key areas today, which you see
on this visual. Let me know on the poll displaying now, which
one would you like to address first?” Another way you can
incorporate choice is to allow them to choose which review
method you’ll use. For example, you could say “We can either
do an online bingo review game or a gameshow-like course
review,” and ask which they would prefer. Of course, both
games need to be ready to go just in case. As you offer the
choice, make it clear their voice matters and you want to hear
from them. They could either respond in a poll, in chat, or
raise their virtual hand for review game A and then review

game B. You might say, “Everyone has a vote today in which
review game we’re going to play. I want to hear from you.
Here we go, the poll is open.”
For additional options outside the platform, you could also
use online surveys such as Poll Everywhere, to display live
learner responses. This way participants can vote on which
subject area they want to learn about first, as long as a linear
structure isn’t required to learn certain information. To do this,
facilitators must chunk their sections by topic so they can
quickly pivot appropriately or have their producer ready to do
so on their behalf. Let’s look at a few more virtual training
examples where you can incorporate more choice and learner
agency.
You might offer learners more choice through breakout
activities. For instance, virtual platforms like InSpace allow
participants to move themselves into a breakout of their
choice, Zoom has an option that lets participants choose a
breakout, and Microsoft Teams and Zoom allow renaming
breakouts. Additionally, instead of assigning one scenario for
all breakouts to work on, you might include options from
which they can choose. For example, list three different
challenging scenarios in the digital workbooks for participants
as a reference. Allow time for everyone to briefly review them
all. Then place learners in breakouts by asking them to choose
one of the three. All scenarios challenge their application of
the content and accomplish the same objective, but they have a
choice in which one they’ll tackle. Be sure to allow extra time
for the team to make their selection, in addition to the time
needed to complete the activity and to decide how they’ll
address the scenario they chose.
Although it may be easy to assume all will benefit from
working together in small breakout discussion groups, this is
not always the case. Some introverts may feel more
comfortable doing independent work. If you poll learners
ahead of time or find out their preferences for working in
small groups or working alone, you can plan appropriately for
your live online learning. For example, if one of my learners
lets me know ahead of time that they feel more comfortable
working independently, then I might place them in their own

breakout to work on an assignment. Don’t make a big deal of
it or call attention to it, just allow some to work independently
because they feel less anxious on their own and may learn
better than if grouped with others. As Jillian Douglas and
Shannon McKenzie (2016) also observed, “Certain activities
worked better for some learners and not for others—some
thrived in group activities, while others preferred to be alone.
If learners felt uncomfortable about speaking aloud in a group
setting or competing against others, it ended up hindering their
learning.” By incorporating choice in how breakouts are used
for small groups or independent work, allowing some
introverts to work independently can also help support
autonomous learning.
Giving virtual learners more space and freedom also
encourages them to take more initiative, which will help them
use their voice in assignments, on whiteboards, in chat, or
verbally in the group at large or in breakouts. The variety of
activities will also help foster engagement. As Jennifer
Hofmann (2019) notes, “Facilitators need to spend a lot of
energy to make sure that learners are consistently engaged.
From my experience, well-designed virtual lessons encourage
learner communication every three to five minutes.” By
encouraging communication, engagement should only grow
with more comments, reflections, insights, and questions from
learners. To ensure you’re empowering learners and not
reducing them to the role of passive recipient, welcome their
thoughts and questions at the times in which they voice their
question and not just during prescribed times at the end of a
segment.
PRO TIP 28
Increase learner agency by creating more
opportunity for their voice to be heard and guided
choice.
Be the Force That Changes Learner Inertia
Inertia is the initial resistance to move from one state to
another. It applies to all objects and all things. In other words,
when you move from a state of rest to a state of action, the

transition period will be difficult. It can feel like you are going
against a river’s current or climbing uphill. Think of the last
time you went on holiday for one or two weeks. When you
returned to work, what was the morning of your first day back
like? Did you require more cups of coffee? Did you have a
hard time getting into a productive flow? Your answer most
likely is yes. Meet inertia. The transition from a vacation
mindset and restful state to a workplace state was probably a
bit rough at first.
This applies to virtual training too. Before logging into an
online class, consider what learners may have been doing
beforehand. They may have just logged off a meeting. They
may have been working independently, writing, or scanning
email. Remember, when they first join, their inertia resists
moving from the state they’re currently in—a state of inaction.
To move into a participatory state requires an uphill shift for
them. Therefore, the very first time they unmute and speak
aloud, post a chat, or write on a whiteboard will require the
most effort on their part. However, once they have
successfully done this and find it emotionally rewarding, you
will notice their participation increase and they will notice it
becomes easier.
As a facilitator, you want to be the force that changes their
inertia. Do this by encouraging them to use virtual tools right
away when they join. One way to prompt this is to give
learners a platform tour. When my producers give a brief
platform tour at the beginning of every virtual training, we
prompt participants to raise their virtual hands as we talk about
the hand-raising feature and where it’s located. When we
highlight the chat, we ask them to post something easy like
which city, province, territory, state, or country they’re
connecting from. When we first ask them to participate and
invite them to move to action, we understand there may be a
little resistance initially.
Light, fun, easy warm-ups are also important at the outset
for this reason. Learners, like athletes, need warm-ups. You
will find that once they unmute and talk aloud, they are also
more likely to talk again. The ice has been broken, so to speak.
Novice facilitators place a group discussion where it seems to

fit with content overall. Intermediate and advanced facilitators
strategically place group discussions after participants are
warmed up, like shortly after a breakout and breakout debrief
if they are well prepped for the discussion by then. Once you
help learners transition from any initial resistance, you’ll begin
to see them feel more comfortable in the space. Observe how
frequently they participate and the depth of their participation
so you can keep a pulse on how to encourage them to open up
even more.
Facilitators are the force that can help transition passive
observers from a “sit and get” mentality to active participants.
“Session interactivity is the single most important priority for
success in the virtual classroom” (Clark and Kwinn 2007). We
guide learners be co-creators of their own learning.
PRO TIP 29
Help participants get past inertia by getting them
involved right away.
Partnering With a Producer
One of the most helpful best practices for live online
facilitation is to partner with a producer. The producer
manages the technical aspects like troubleshooting, monitoring
the chat, and assisting as needed so the facilitator can better
focus on learners and the instructional content. There are just
so many duties with live online learning that it can be
incredibly challenging and stressful to manage alone, can
require more testing ahead of time, and can take more time to
resolve and work through issues. I love working with a
producer because I know the producer has my back. They
support learners’ use of the platform and resolve technical
issues so I carry less stress load and, as a result, I can be a
better facilitator.
While an official producer might seem like a luxury to those
who are learning departments of one, this does not need to be a
full-time role. There are creative solutions. For example, you
can ask a summer intern, a trusted confidant, a colleague, or a
succession planning candidate who is looking for an
opportunity to step into an entry-level L&D role. Back before

our field formally recommended producers, I occasionally
asked my business partner to sit next to me to help with the
technical aspects of virtual training or webinars. Sometimes, I
asked a client contact to serve in this assistive role. Partnering
with a producer helps virtual training be successful, whether
it’s managing time, assisting with multiple tasks, or even
carrying out facilitative tasks.
Time Management
Carefully managing time throughout your virtual training
session is a must. Virtual training pioneer Jennifer Hofmann
identifies time management as a critical competency to
becoming a masterful facilitator, noting how surprisingly
difficult this can be for facilitators. As Hofmann (2019)
explains, online time management is the “ability to manage a
virtual event in such a way that learners are engaged and
desired outcomes are met, and the event is kept to a strict
timetable.”
I find that if I thoughtfully prepare how long each section
might take ahead of time in my facilitator guide (for example,
the opening exercise, a breakout, or a whiteboard activity), I
can always check time estimates as I go. This tells me quickly
if I need to speed up or slow down without learners ever
knowing. I have found it’s helpful to include the actual time in
the guide; for example, 10–10:10 a.m. The challenge with
listing time by minutes (such as 5 minutes or 8 minutes) is that
with a quick glance, you are not able to gain a sense of
whether you’re behind, ahead, or on schedule. In the moment,
you do not want to spend the mental capacity to figure out if
it’s been 10 minutes since you began an activity. Additionally,
always build in a buffer of at least 10 minutes overall to give
yourself wiggle room as needed. Keeping the time visible on a
device, nearby clock, or smartwatch is also essential.
Skilled facilitators can also adjust estimated time on the fly
as needed. For example, if participants are engaged in rich
group discussion, you might make the impromptu decision to
give them more time for the discussion. A novice facilitator
might prefer to stick to the planned, original time estimates

and cut off a rich but extended discussion. However, an
intermediate-to-advanced facilitator weighs learning as the
higher priority. If you determine there is greater value in
lengthening the discussion, you might decide to cut the next
break shorter or remove an activity near the end.
Of course, you never want to say aloud “We really need to
move on now, we’ve already spent too much time discussing
this,” or “We have a lot to cover, so we’ll have to leave it
there.” This is the type of comment that kills conversation and
would hinder future discussions with the group. Keep the
juggling of time, content, and schedule behind the curtain. As
Walt Disney World has taught their cast members, keep
backstage items backstage. This helps make it a better
experience for guests. Remember, we are creating positive
experiences for learners.
Partnering with a producer makes this much easier to
manage. Referencing a shared facilitator guide makes it easier
to follow estimated times for each instructional segment. The
pre-estimated timed segments help you adjust on the fly as
needed. As mentioned previously, some of my producers even
send me a private chat when we’re getting close to the end in
case I need to wrap up an activity quicker.
Task Switching and Multitasking
There is no doubt that synchronous training requires managing
multiple activities concurrently. This can be taxing on the
facilitator. The good news is that the more experience you gain
facilitating online learning events, the more automated some
of the rote tasks will become (such as scanning chat, saving a
whiteboard, or quickly finding the annotation toolbar). The
more experience you have doing these activities, the less
cognitive thinking they require. This, then, frees up precious
thinking resources for other tasks that require more mental
processing such as explaining your visuals, reading
particpants’ responses, and listening to their questions. When
facilitators try to manage all of this at once, they can
experience cognitive overload, which is “the amount of mental
work imposed on working memory” (Clark and Kwinn 2007).

It can feel overwhelming and becomes too much to handle
mentally. (Cognitive load, of course, also applies to learners,
which will be addressed more in chapter 8.)
Another term that some reference is task switching. This is
when the brain focuses heavily on a single task like writing a
paper, but then a distraction comes up where they must switch
to a different task and then come back to the original task.
Concentration level and flow take a hit when returning to the
original task. When we train online, we’re not so much deeply
focused on a single task, but rather scanning the dashboard and
keeping abreast of all that is happening. For example, you
might be monitoring chat, watching the hand raises in a
participant panel, sharing your screen with visuals, talking
aloud, and annotating your slides. How can a facilitator
manage all this at once?
Well, when your hands are full, you hire more hands. This is
the beauty of partnering with a producer. When you work with
a producer, you offload many of these tasks. For example, you
can ask your producer to pull up the polls and broadcast
results, let you know when there are key questions in chat you
missed, help learners with technical issues, and bring up the
whiteboard. If they mainly assist with technical issues, virtual
training expert Kassy LaBorie (2021) refers to them as a
technical producer. They earn their worth in gold assisting
you. At the end of all virtual training sessions, I always give a
shout-out to our producer because it truly is a partnership. You
might say something like, “And special thanks as always to
Maria, our producer, for keeping everything running smoothly
today.”
Advanced Functions for Producers
Sometimes producers can even take on more advanced roles
beyond the technical aspects. If they are a seasoned producer,
this enables them to share more in the facilitation
responsibilities. Kassy LaBorie (2021), in Producing Virtual
Training, Meetings, and Webinars: Master the Technology to
Engage Participants, calls this type of producer a facilitative
producer. When I work with seasoned producers, for example,

I ask them to pop into different breakouts to check on group
progress if they’re also familiar with the topic, because with
the two of us, we can cover more ground and at least one of us
can visit every breakout. I have also worked with a producer
who had a high-end camera and a very professional, blurred
backdrop so I asked her ahead of time if we could use her as
an exemplar when we talked about professional backgrounds
for an online presence class. So, a producer’s level of
involvement depends on their experience and familiarity with
the training topic. Regardless, partnering with a producer is a
recommended best practice.
Summary
When I referred to a client’s experience at the beginning of
this chapter, she had accurately assessed that online facilitators
have “a lot going on.” Facilitators truly do wear many hats.
We play multiple roles: facilitator, observer, connector,
communicator, and time manager to name a few. As you
continue to grow in your facilitation skill set, you’ll find many
of the tasks become more automated, and therefore less taxing.
Of course, partnering with a producer or co-facilitator can also
help immensely with task sharing and overall execution.
There are many tips and techniques you can apply to keep
learners engaged and elevate your facilitation skills. Overall,
we want to help learners successfully navigate the black hole
of sensory input, and we want to recognize, respect, and
reward their participation. Skilled virtual facilitators guide
learners to be co-creators of their own learning while deeply
engaging them cognitively, emotionally, socially, and
behaviorally.
Not only is it important to be a skilled facilitator, but it’s
also important to build your on-camera facilitator presence. In
the next chapter, we’ll look at what you can do to specifically
build your on-camera competence.
As you apply these pro tips with continued practice, you
will be on your way to becoming an expert in the online
facilitation capability. Remember, you are the force that
changes learners’ inertia. As skilled facilitators we can help

participants transition from initial resistance to meaningful
contribution. We do not force learners, but we slowly reward,
nurture, and encourage their involvement in multiple ways. So,
as you go forward, may the virtual facilitation force be with
you and come out of you!
Pro Tips for Practicing your
Online Facilitation Skills
TIP
19
Make the invisible audible by talking your task.
TIP
20
Acknowledge and address potential learner objections aloud at
the time they might be thinking them.
TIP
21
Use announced silence to give learners brief spaces to
complete activities or study complex visuals, and communicate
beforehand when, why, and how long you’ll be silent.
TIP
22
Treat virtual public space as a conversational space for all.
TIP
23
Give learners a heads-up when they may be called upon to
share.
TIP
24
Provide instructions three ways, three times for more involved
activities.
TIP
25
Genuinely affirm learners’ contributions aloud, build on their
responses, and where appropriate dig deeper.
TIP
26
Draw connections to learners’ previous comments by referring
to them throughout.
TIP
27
Present multiple options to learners within a guided structure.
TIP
28
Increase learner agency by creating more opportunity for their
voice to be heard and guided choice.
TIP
Help participants get past inertia by getting them involved right

29
away.

“Understand that face-to-face interactions are hugely
important to the brain. So, anything that you can do in a
virtual classroom that approximates face-to-face interaction
… do it.”
—Janet Zadina, Educational Neuroscientist

Developing Your
Professional On-Camera
Competence
Imagine you are the virtual learner in this scenario. You log in
to attend virtual training only to be greeted by an empty video
frame. A webcam is on, but the facilitator is nowhere to be
seen. Eventually, you watch a figure take their place on a
chair. A spinning ceiling fan hangs conveniently just above the
facilitator’s head, and they are silhouetted by a sunny window
behind them. Your trainer’s face is cropped at the chin and
appears larger than life as it peers down at you. The room
behind them has a bright overhead light that creates a halo-like
glare on the screen. As the facilitator begins to talk, they move
their hands rapidly in and out of view, calling your attention to
the blurs as the camera tries to capture the rapid movement.
Sometimes their hands block the camera view, and, at times,
even their face. In the background, you detect several bicycles
against the wall. You try to figure out what brand they are and
how they compare to your own bike since there’s that race
coming up soon. …
Clearly, this is not the visual experience you want learners
to have, especially as a first impression. So, what might an
exemplar look like? Let’s contrast this opening scenario with a
different one. Imagine again that you are the learner. This
time, you log in to find your facilitator easy to see, well-lit,
and wearing a smile that makes them seem friendly and
approachable. You can hear them very well and notice their
virtual background, which makes them look professional and
credible. As you look at them onscreen, it feels as though they

are right across from you and looking right at you. You see
some of their upper body and even a few hand gestures as they
begin to greet and welcome you to class. You think to
yourself, “I bet this is going to be a really good class.”
As you can see, artfully weaving a facilitator’s live video
into virtual training requires more than just turning on a
webcam and letting it roll. Although this may seem like a
basic skill, the fact that some practitioners do not yet
demonstrate on-camera competence is why we address it here.
There are still plenty of examples of poor lighting, distracting
backgrounds, awkward positions in the camera frame, too
much headroom, blurred gestures, no eye contact, or a
facilitator looking away at another computer monitor for much
of the duration, to name a few. Although it’s often a matter of
not knowing what one doesn’t yet know, this new digital
literacy is an essential core business skill for the 21st century.
This chapter is designed to help you develop your facilitator
presence with on-camera knowledge and skills. Developing
this capability will help you convey a sense of presence with
learners while sharing space online. Growing in this area will
also build your on-camera presence as credible, competent,
and professional facilitator. When done well, it contributes to
how closely and attentively learners decide to listen to you,
because credibility—especially in the training topic area—is
even more important online than in the traditional classroom.
With synchronous classes, there are myriad potential
distractions for learners, as we’ve addressed. Overall,
mastering the facilitator presence capability will help you take
your virtual training to the next level.
In this chapter, we’ll identify proven practices for effective
and professional camera use and call out ineffective techniques
as well. This chapter goes beyond the basics of turning on
your webcam to see if you can pull it off somehow. It explores
the benefits and challenges, offers specific guidance about
when and when not be on camera, and discusses appropriate
backgrounds, the technical aspects of lighting, nonverbal on-
camera cues, proper angles, what clothing colors work best on
camera, and framing yourself in the lens. So, let’s jump in and
roll the camera.

THE BIG IDEA
As facilitators, be on camera with proper
Background, Lighting, Expressions, Angle,
Clothing, and Headroom (B-L-E-A-C-H) during
purposeful connection moments.
Facilitating on Camera
Because most people are uncomfortable being on camera, in
the past virtual trainers have sometimes opted to keep cameras
turned off. When video technology was still evolving, many of
us only taught with audio or just displayed a still photo of
ourselves in the upper corner of the virtual platform. Back
then, bandwidth was extremely limited, which presented
additional challenges for video. The thinking was that an
instructor’s photo could at least connect learners to the human
being behind the disembodied voice. But because video
technology, bandwidth, and virtual training platforms have
significantly improved, displaying a still image of a virtual
trainer for the duration of training has become old school.
We live in a world with growing demand for video. In
modern learning environments, we have the capability and
improved technology to incorporate quality video on most
platforms. There is no doubt video has emerged as the
dominant communication medium. In 2020 alone, 500 hours
of new videos were uploaded to YouTube every minute, and 1
billion hours of YouTube videos were watched daily (Smith
2020). The video revolution is here.
Notably, in 2020 and 2021 the COVID-19 pandemic
boosted widespread use of webcams by creating an
unprecedented need for remote work and connection. This also
affected formal training, as organizations rushed to convert
traditional in-person training to online learning using video
conferencing and virtual training platforms. Many online
training offerings experimented with greater use of webcams
for both facilitators and learners (Figure 5-1).
There are certainly exemplars of instructional models where
webcams are not used. Khan Academy, for example, employs

a generous and hugely successful virtual learning model
without showing instructors on video. Founder and CEO
Salman Khan created a virtual learning academy to provide
free world-class education to anyone over the internet. Instead
of on-camera video, he and his instructors record spoken audio
while illustrating onscreen as they teach.
So, it appears you can still achieve learning objectives
without a video of a facilitator’s face, but are there any other
compelling reasons to use it? And how often are webcams
currently 
used 
among 
virtual 
facilitators 
worldwide?
According to virtual training expert Cindy Huggett’s The State
of Virtual Training 2020 global survey, 83 percent of
facilitators reported using webcams in virtual training and 66
percent reported using webcams more in 2020 than they had in
previous years (Huggett 2020). In addition, 48 percent
reported using them for the entire duration of their virtual
training classes, and 36 percent said they used them for at least
some of the class. This data was collected from nearly 900
respondents between May and July 2020.
Figure 5-1. Example of On-Camera Facilitator
The next question we might ask ourselves is: Just because
virtual trainers can use live video, does this mean we should?
Let’s examine the benefits and challenges webcams offer to
see if we can discover some answers.

On-Camera Benefits
Two large-scale field studies out of Stanford University
studied the impact of incorporating instructors’ faces with
video versus providing virtual instruction with audio only
(Kizilcec, Bailenson, and Gomez 2015). They found no
significant differences in learning outcomes between whether
the instructor’s webcam was shown or not. However, although
turning on instructor webcams did not appear to significantly
aid or degrade learning transfer, the Stanford study suggested
it did have two additional benefits for learners:
• An improved overall experience
• An increased sense of social presence
These are significant findings. First, we recognize the
importance of learners reporting improved experiences based
on our discussion of LXD in chapter 2. Second, because this
chapter focuses on the facilitator presence capability, we also
recognize the value of establishing a sense of social presence
online. The term social presence was defined decades ago in
the book The Social Psychology of Telecommunications as
learners’ ability to feel like they’re together with others and
share a felt sense of virtual community, even though they’re
remote (Short, Williams, and Christie 1976).
When you are on camera as a virtual facilitator, you want to
build this sense of online community, which ties into both the
social and emotional dimensions of learning. So, should
facilitators use their live video cameras? If including live
video of the trainer improves the overall experience and
increases the sense of social connection, then yes, this is
something we want to use. Later in this chapter, we’ll
investigate more specifically when it is most optimal to be on
camera.
This general sense of connectedness isn’t the whole story.
Further research has revealed more specifics about how on-
camera presence enhances learning (Figure 5-2). In a 2021
webcam study conducted by Florida State University (FSU),
more than 500 learning professionals were surveyed to
determine how webcams are used and perceived. Their results

identified the following benefits (Dennen, Word, and Arslan
2021). Webcam use:
• Promoted a sense of closeness
• Made it easier for the facilitator to guide discussion among
participants
• Discouraged multi-tasking among participants
• Enhanced listening
These relational and communication benefits should be
additionally weighed for how they engage participants through
the social dimension of learning. When bandwidth is
sufficient, webcams can offer added value to virtual training
programs.
So far, we have uncovered multiple benefits to including a
live video feed of a facilitator in virtual learning. The next
question, then, is what are the challenges of being on-camera
and are there conditions for its effective use?
Figure 5-2. Webcams Influence on Listening
On-Camera Challenges
Although being on-camera appears to help facilitators better
establish a sense of presence and place, feelings of closeness,
enhanced listening, and improved experience, there can also
be challenges to being on camera frequently. Let’s explore
some of the challenges to the live video feature in training
platforms next.

Screen and On-Camera Fatigue
If you facilitate several virtual training sessions a day, you
may experience varying levels of fatigue. Virtual participants
are not exempt from this either. When either you or your
participants are on camera, people may feel like they are in the
spotlight or feel the need to act differently (and not be
themselves). As a result, they may intentionally try to be more
facially animated or nod more frequently to show they are
listening. However, if this is not their normal state of being, it
can be taxing after a while. It is always exhausting to project
something that is not who you really are. As Clemson
University Professor Marissa Shuffler adds, you realize
everybody is looking at you when you are on camera. Because
of this, some people feel social pressure to perform like
they’re on a stage, which can be even more stressful and
fatiguing (Jiang 2020). According to Professor Gianpiero
Petriglieri, when we communicate through live video, we also
work harder to interpret nonverbal cues like vocal tone, facial
expression, and body language. Because we are devoting more
attention and processing resources to action, it consumes more
of our energy (Jiang 2020).
Another mentally taxing piece is the scanning and
processing people do to all the live, individual video streams
of participants and their backgrounds. One solution for this is
the Together Mode feature in Microsoft Teams, which uses
artificial intelligence (AI) to digitally place participants in a
shared background. This view requires less mental effort
because it brings all participants on camera into a singular and
visual, virtual space. This view is also controlled by each
participant individually. Zoom’s Immersive View also allows
hosts to display shared background scenes for all.
So, there appears to be a need for balance and
recommendations regarding webcams for virtual training. We
know that long durations of use can be especially taxing for
participants, and sometimes even for facilitators, depending on
the frequency. But there’s also another challenge with being on
camera. Sometimes, it can feel unnatural.

Being on Camera Can Feel Unnatural
Because virtual training can capitalize on the on-camera
medium, how you show up on camera can set the stage for
your 
relationship 
building, 
presence, 
credibility,
connectedness, rapport, attention holding, and more. However,
most people feel uneasy on camera. They may report feeling
like everyone is looking at them, as if they were giving a
presentation. Just because we’re facilitating from behind our
computer screens doesn’t mean public speaking anxiety fades
away.
One way to think about being on camera is to reframe it.
Although it may feel like the pressure is on you as the
facilitator, the reality is the video is not there for you. You turn
on the webcam for your learners. Your goal is to establish an
on-camera presence as their facilitator. This provides a visual
way for learners to connect with you. We know from extensive
research in online learning that a guide on the side, an avatar
expert, or a pedagogical agent can provide supportive and
helpful assistance to learning. Learners respond well to expert
guides. And of course, an instructor’s video camera can
provide more visual cues than learners would otherwise
receive through audio alone. So, remember, the reason we turn
on the camera is not for us, it’s for learners. It helps learners
discern a sense of place, a sense of person, and a sense of
presence.
Drawn to Self-Views
Interestingly, many people tend to use their webcam self-view
like a mirror. They watch their own live video more than
others. According to FSU’s 2021 Webcams at Work study, 75
percent of more than 500 learning professional participants
said they watched themselves when they were on camera
(Dennen, Word, and Arslan 2021). You have likely observed
people fixing their hair or preening on camera. Maybe you
have even done this yourself. If you find that you gravitate
toward watching yourself and it becomes distracting, most
platforms do allow the option to turn off your self-view. As
Professor Shuffler adds, it’s very difficult for people not to be

drawn to looking at their own face as if it were an onscreen
mirror, or to be more conscious of what they’re doing in front
of it (Jiang 2020).
In short, there are certainly some challenges with webcam
use that include screen fatigue, feeling unnatural on camera, or
even being mesmerized by the view of oneself to which we are
naturally accustomed with mirrors. However, as previously
established, there are also benefits that are compelling reasons
for use. So, how do we balance it all? Let’s identify some
practical guidelines next.
When Should Live Cameras Be Used in Virtual
Training?
We know that when a facilitator is on camera, it can improve
the experience for learners and increase their perception of a
facilitator’s presence, which is important for learning. On the
flipside, it can also distract attention from where learners need
to focus if not done well, and it can be fatiguing. Weighing
these benefits and challenges, the next vital question is when
and how should webcams be used for virtual training?
Clearly, just because we have access to a feature doesn’t
mean we should use it all the time. Balance is usually the best
way to go. Think of the number of fonts and features available
to use in a PowerPoint presentation. I recall looking at a
colleague’s work in which she had attempted to use multiple
fonts on the same slide, just because she could. What you’re
thinking right now is exactly right. It was Overkill with a
capital O.
Applying this to webcam use with virtual training, one
common temptation for instructors is to leave webcams on for
the duration of an entire virtual class. It is easy to see why. To
begin, it is certainly easier. For example, facilitators can turn
on their video cameras, let them run, and not worry about them
again until their session concludes. However, is this the best
option for all parties involved?
Intermediate and advanced facilitators are mindful of where
they want learners to focus during instruction and have a

pedagogical rationale for doing so. When we approach on-
camera use from this perspective, learners do not always need
to be looking at facilitators on camera, or themselves, or their
colleagues. For example, you do not need to be on camera
when you are no longer talking after introducing a guest expert
or subject matter expert who’s joining your class. If you
continue to talk and direct questions to an expert in an ongoing
dialogue, then it makes sense to stay on camera. However, if
you are observing and listening only, you do not need to
compete with the other visuals onscreen for learners. In this
way, we use the camera’s on/off switch to direct more
attention and focus. Think about it as foreground and
background. When you are the background and your learners
are leading activities, a guest expert is sharing, or the group is
working on the whiteboard together, you can go off camera.
We want to use video when it serves a purpose. I
recommend turning your camera on during purposeful
connection moments. These are the moments when the focus
of the interaction is interpersonal and it’s essential for learners
to see your nonverbal cues and facial expression. For example,
when you lead a discussion with an open-ended question
prompt, turn off your slides and invite learners to turn on their
cameras. If a learner prefers not to come on camera, you
should never force them, but as a preventive measure do set
expectations in your pre-class communications for learners to
be camera-ready to increase the likelihood of them doing so.
Here are some examples of what I call purposeful
connection 
moments. 
These 
are 
times 
to 
optimize
interpersonal connection and turn on your camera as
facilitator:
• Welcoming and greeting participants
• Introducing the facilitator, producer, guests, or learners
• Large-group discussions
• Small-group breakouts
• When you share a story to illustrate important training
topic points

• Explaining instructions for more complicated activities
• Modeling or demonstrating something
• Role plays
• When learners present or teach-back on something as a
learning activity
• To emphasize key points
• When you close the training, as a bookend to how the
session began
There are also times to explicitly turn off your camera.
Webcams, for example, should be off when you step away
from your desk before class starts or during a break. On one
occasion, I logged in early to a virtual training class, and
observed the trainer finishing up his technical setup and prep;
then he proceeded to leave on his webcam and leave the room.
As a result, my first impression, along with my colleagues
who joined shortly thereafter, was being greeted by an empty
chair.
Another time to remain off camera is when you want to
direct focus: “Use webcams on the front-end to establish
presence and place, but then you can turn them off to focus
and direct attention to other visual points of focus” (Howles
2015). For example, if there is a complex diagram or visual
that learners need to process, or if you want to focus
exclusively on a whiteboard activity, turn off your camera to
direct focus to the visual or whiteboard. You might also turn
off your camera when you are training people how to use a
new system by demonstrating the software or platform. For the
same reason, you want to direct their visual focus to the
elements onscreen while your audio fills in the explanatory
gaps to supplement what they’re seeing.
However, in some cases, evidence-based research suggests
that when concurrently screen sharing supporting visuals, a
small video image of the facilitator, trainer, or instructor is
more effective for learning (Pi, Hong, and Yang 2017). So
rather than going off camera entirely, you can make the
explanatory slides or supporting visuals large, while your

camera becomes smaller. A small image is just enough to
establish facilitator presence without competing with other
visuals onscreen. This research from Central China Normal
University studied the effect of multimedia with an instructor’s
image and accompanying supporting visuals for video
lectures. They discovered that “learners gained more
knowledge from the video lecture with the small image of the
instructor, and they experienced more satisfaction with it” (Pi,
Hong, and Yang 2017).
All in all, facilitators can be on camera during purposeful
connection moments to leverage the benefits discussed in this
chapter. This balancing act recognizes that an all-or-nothing
approach is not the best fit; instead, find the right times to aid
learners by turning on your camera during opportune times.
Next, let’s look at what you can do to project the best on-
camera image during those purposeful moments.
Clean Up Your On-Camera Image With
BLEACH
Up to this point, we’ve explored the value an on-camera
facilitator can add for learners and learning experiences.
We’ve also clarified the conditions under which webcam use
for facilitators is most optimal and when to consider turning it
off. Now we’ll turn our attention to specifically developing
your facilitator presence when you are on camera. So, what are
the things you most need to do? I’ve identified six key
elements to help you come across effectively and
professionally. I use the acronym BLEACH to remind you and
others how to clean up your professional image in the camera
frame. BLEACH stands for background, lighting, expressions,
angle, clothing, and headroom. As demonstrated in Figure 5-3,
all these elements work together to present you in the most
credible and professional way. Let’s explore each in more
detail.
Figure 5-3. B-L-E-A-C-H: Good On-Camera Example

B Is for Background
To begin, the visible background behind you matters. Why,
you ask? Because the camera frame subconsciously signals to
learners that everything within this frame should be closely
examined. It directs attention to its contents.
Think about what captures your attention the most. Is it
something novel? Is it something interesting to you?
Something surprising? Or is it movement, as we explore in
chapter 8? It may, in fact, be all of the above. We, as human
beings, are wired to pay attention to stimuli. Unfortunately, in
virtual training, stimuli can also be distracting, like a ceiling
fan visible right above a facilitator’s head.
A busy, cluttered, bright, moving, or odd background can
call attention to itself and distract learners away from where
they should be focused. Fortunately, there are several things
we can do to pick an appropriate background. Whether you
use a real green screen, a virtual green screen, a blurred image
of your real physical room, a backdrop, slides as your
background, or a virtual background, the measuring stick
during your selection process should be to ensure that your
background is secondary, not primary, and that it supports you
and your topic, not the other way around.
PRO TIP 30
Minimize or remove visual distractions from view
in the camera frame.

Tidy What’s Visible in Your Physical Room
If you choose to use your real, physical environment as your
background, find a pleasant room or background in your
environment that looks professional (for example, a makeshift
desk or work area is preferred over a kitchen sink in the
background). With video, it’s even better to show a little depth
behind you. You want to avoid being right up against a wall, if
possible, which can come across flat. Try to show more of a
room, home, or hallway to create more open space behind you
for more depth. You can also purposely place things in your
background to make the environment more appealing, such as
simple artwork or a plant or two.
Some virtual instructors may not realize their background is
distracting. For example, you’ve likely seen some people on
camera whose backgrounds seem to be overflowing with
storage items, crowded bookshelves, gigantic piles of papers
and binders, or messy closets. These visual elements compete
for viewer attention and direct learners away from key training
concepts. Sometimes, it’s just a matter of removing the
busyness on the wall behind you. Instead of eight plaques or
picture frames hanging on the wall, consider simplifying it to a
few. Avoid clutter as indicated in the poor example in Figure
5-4, and clean up the area because this can present you in a
more professional light. Our job as virtual facilitators is to
minimize or eliminate those background distractions so
learners can focus their attention on the core learning
objectives.
Figure 5-4. Distracting On-Camera Background

People can also be curious and start noticing things in your
background and then stop listening to you. For this reason, real
estate agents advise house sellers to empty or at least minimize
the books on their shelves when they place their homes on the
market. Why? People can be drawn to look at the book titles
because they’re curious about what the homeowners might be
reading. Instead, agents want homebuyers’ focus to be on the
house. In a similar vein, we want to direct learners away from
the background, as illustrated in the opening story, and instead
direct their attention to what you’re saying as the facilitator.
Attention is a precious commodity and we only have so much
of it.
It’s also important to keep a designated space that’s free of
clutter and ready to go. And you want to choose a space that
reflects professionalism for your virtual training programs. For
example, one of my clients who is an attorney was delivering a
virtual legal message; after carefully considering the best
backdrop for him and we decided that legal office best
supported his professional message. However, if dedicating an
entire room to be clutter-free is too difficult or not possible, as
long as what can be seen on camera is tidy it’s OK if the rest
of the room is a disaster.
Blur Your Background
Some virtual training platforms allow you to blur your
background. This can add a very professional touch to your

backdrop because it makes you, the facilitator, visually pop.
This blurring capability also allows you to maintain your real
environment with less concern about what’s, such as your
colleagues behind you at the office walking by, or your
kitchen, bedroom, attic, laundry room, or any other space you
prefer not to professionally showcase.
Purchase a Backdrop
Another solution is to purchase a physical backdrop to place
behind you. There are a variety of photo backdrops available.
This provides a way to quickly cover your background if it’s
not possible to tidy or declutter the space beforehand.
Backdrops can be placed in such a way that all learners see is
you, which neutralizes the background and still supports you
as the feature on which we want learners to be focused (Figure
5-5).
Figure 5-5. Professional On-Camera Background
Use Slides as Your Background
Several virtual training platforms also allow facilitators to
project slide content behind their own video feed as a
backdrop. This way, learners see an integrated image of both
you and your slide as the video feed is overlaid on your slide.
For example, in Zoom you can silhouette yourself with your
slide behind you. Your content slide then becomes your
backdrop. If you use this feature, ensure important data on

slides is not hidden from view by your silhouette. Practice
ahead of time to know how gestures will come across with this
backdrop and how best to interact with your content by
strategically pointing when you are visually integrated into
your content. Be ready to redesign slides once you test them
out as needed.
Microsoft Teams also offers facilitators the ability to use
Presenter Mode. This allows the facilitator to choose from
several formats, which would project differently for learners
based on what they select. For instance, with a Standout
format, facilitators are silhouetted with the slide behind them.
In Reporter format, facilitators can use the slide as a visual aid
over their shoulder, as you might see in a traditional television
newscast, and then the side-by-side option allows the
facilitator to be in a separate frame with their slide content in a
frame adjacent to them.
Explore a Virtual Background Option
Most video conferencing platforms have virtual backdrops
from which you can choose. As technology evolves and
improves, we will see many more customized options become
available. The challenge is that backgrounds can also upstage
facilitators and draw learner attention to the background
instead of content material.
Ideally, a professional virtual background would provide a
neutral scene or color that does not compete with you in the
foreground. Be cautious of virtual backdrops that may be “fun
and cool,” but could also be distracting. For example, if a
background includes video movement like an ocean tide with
waves that continuously crash onto a shore, it may draw
learners’ attention away from you.
Overall, select a background that is truly a background, so
you become foreground as you provide feedback to learners,
offer explanations, ask for follow-up, share a professional
example of a concept you’re teaching, and more.
PRO TIP 31
Select a virtual backdrop that does not call
attention to itself.

L Is for Lighting
Video requires lots of light. Lots. One of the most common on-
camera errors is poor lighting, either because the facilitator’s
image is too dark, one side of a facilitator’s face is too bright,
or one side of the face is in shadow. In virtual training, your
learners want to be able to see you and your entire face.
An added benefit of good lighting is that it can even make
you look younger. If that’s important to you, read on. With
poor lighting, wrinkles are more visible. But proper lighting
has a smoothing effect that can hide wrinkles. Not a bad perk,
right? Fortunately, there are several things you can do to
improve your lighting and help elevate your facilitator
presence to the next level.
Light From the Front
First, always light yourself from the front. This means placing
your light source in front of you, not behind you. So, avoid
sitting or standing with a window directly behind you. As you
can see in the poor example in Figure 5-6, when you are
backlit, the light will either bleed in through the window like a
halo-effect or cast you in silhouette. Natural light from a
window in front of you does work well though. It’s about
paying attention to how well-lit your face is. Good lighting
will also separate you from the background. You’ll want to
turn off visible ceiling lights as well, because these can
become bright distractions that stand out and create shadows.
Figure 5-6. Examples of Poor Lighting
Soften Lighting

It’s also best to ensure your light source is not too harsh, like
direct light from a side window on a sunny afternoon. You can
either close your window shades if the daylight is too bright or
use soft lamps on either side of your computer. You can also
bounce light off a wall to diffuse or soften it. There are very
affordable collapsible light reflectors you can keep on hand for
just such a purpose. This can be handy if you find you are
frequently training near a side window when bright light
streams in.
I have light sources on both sides of my computer, which
helps prevent casting a shadow on half of my face. One of
them is an Elgato Key Light Air, and I access the Control
Center app for it from my smartphone. The app allows me to
power the light and off, as well as control the brightness and
color temperature based on the time of day and the current
lighting in my home office. Daylight tends to be more blueish
and incandescent light tends to have a more reddish-orange
hue. It’s best not to mix these different types of light, so
depending on the amount of sunlight streaming into your space
or whether the shade is drawn, you can appropriately adjust
the light in the room. With a little effort, you can significantly
improve your visibility and create a higher quality image with
good lighting.
PRO TIP 32
Light yourself from the front with plenty of soft,
even lighting.
E Is for Expressions
In addition to elevating the professionalism of a facilitator’s
video image, your nonverbal expressions can play a role in
your onscreen effectiveness. The camera can reveal
personality, physical attributes, facial expressions, upper body
language, and multiple other nonverbal cues that we would
otherwise not be able to interpret in an audio-only space. It
might be a nod of the head, a head tilt sideways, looking
interested, or direct eye contact through the camera lens that
hits a message home to learners. Thus, virtual trainers should
ensure their facial expressions, eye contact with the lens, hand

gestures, and other body movement all work together to create
an engaging and professional facilitator presence.
Facial Expressions
Leverage your camera to convey your facial expressions,
specifically your smile, as this can help learners connect with
you. According to educational neuroscientist Janet Zadina, “A
smile lights up the reward center of the brain” (Howles 2020).
It also reduces stress by producing positive reward chemicals.
When content-appropriate, allow yourself to smile naturally.
This can also communicate that you are approachable
(important if you want learners to ask you questions) and
friendly. This does not mean you should shine those pearly
whites throughout your entire training regardless of context.
However, when it is appropriate to what you’re saying, smile
in a way that is friendly, relaxed, and pleasant. Other facial
expressions—such as raising your eyebrows, widening your
eyes, and more animated expressions—can help build rapport
with learners, especially as they first settle into virtual training.
Based on a facial expressions study from China Normal
University, video lectures where the instructors used a
heightened level of expressiveness promoted better student
arousal levels and learning satisfaction than conventional
instructor expression or audio-only (Wang et al. 2018).
PRO TIP 33
Be facially expressive in a natural way to aid
learning.
As the virtual trainer, you may feel that a cold, impersonal
lens does not bring out your personality. In fact, video has a
way of depleting energy for most people. However, there are
ways to keep your energy up. Natural nervousness will fuel
excitement, which can be channeled as energy. Additionally,
energy decreases when you are sitting, so some find that
placing their computer on a standing desk increases their
ability to muster extra energy naturally. If you come across
without enthusiasm and passion, your learners—even on the
other side of the screen—will feel it too. If you only focus on
the reality of the situation—that is, that you are speaking to a
cold, camera lens in a room by yourself far away from

everyone else—your training facilitation can also come across
without connection.
Camera Lens Eye Contact
You are likely familiar with the basics of looking at the camera
lens for virtual eye contact. However, as we discussed earlier,
being on camera is unnatural for most people. In fact, many
people forget to blink when they look at a video camera lens
(almost like a deer in headlights). As one optometrist shared
with me, most people naturally blink 20 times per minute, but
when looking at computer screens (or cold, impersonal camera
lenses), some people only blink five times per minute. So,
remember to blink!
Obviously in the virtual space, trainers and learners alike do
not have the benefit of direct eye contact. However, we can
create the illusion of eye contact by looking at the camera lens
when we can. Online instruction and teaching still is very
much about relationships, and even though learners may seem
invisible, eye contact is a way to help establish this direct
connection. As the adage reminds us, eyes are the windows to
the soul.
Looking into a camera lens when it is feasible to do so
while training does not come easy to most people, even
experienced virtual trainers. I’ve tested my desktop computer
and used the front-facing camera and video recording feature
to look at myself locking eyes with the camera in three
different ways. Then I played back the video to determine
among all those points of focus when it really looked like I
was looking at the camera. Then marked this spot with a small
X made of tape on my computer screen so I would know
exactly where to look when I wanted to communicate with
direct eye contact. Obviously, there are other places you need
to look as well while teaching—for example, at chat, at
participants on camera, and at the whiteboard. But for
openings and closings, discussions, and key points, or when
responding to participant questions during those key
connection moments, you want to look directly at the camera
lens.

You might be thinking, it’s not realistic for me to do that all
the time. The point is to do it when you can. Sure, you must
look away at chat or look down or search on your other
monitor for the next file to share. But as you are able, come
back to re-establish contact through the camera lens.
Whether speaking or not, where you choose to look is still
visible to learners. If your eyes dart around or look down or to
the side, learners will wonder where you’re looking. Your eye
contact is not only a powerful way to connect to your viewing
audience, but a useful tool for directing focus. Learn to
leverage the power of eye contact with the camera lens.
PRO TIP 34
Adjust yourself to be more eye level with the
camera, and when instructionally feasible, look
directly at the camera lens.
Hand Gestures
Hand gestures are another form of expression. Some wonder if
we should even use hand gestures on camera. I and many
others say yes because gestures are a natural part of
communicating and they help others interpret what we are
saying. According to communication coach Nick Morgan
(2021), hand gestures can help communicate emphasis,
comprehension, and even conviction, so they should still be
included in online video communications. One research study
on gestures in video lectures found that instructors’ use of
gestures—specifically pointing gestures—not only influenced
learning, but also improved teaching (Yang et al. 2019).
However, most facilitators believe they can just talk and use
their hands in a virtual setting like they have always done.
That’s not always the case. For example, you will need to
make sure you are sitting a bit farther from your computer to
ensure your hand gestures are still visible.
While being on camera enables you to use movement and
gestures to engage your learners, video is just a series of still
frames played in rapid succession to give the impression of
movement. When we view a series of still images at a set
speed, it gives the appearance of moving video and the illusion

of movement. Video technology cannot capture every
movement in real space. Think of it like animation. You see
the individual drawings with slight changes in each drawing.
When those same drawings are flipped in rapid succession,
you perceive the illusion of movement or animation. It looks
like movement, but it is really a collection of slightly different
still images.
You may have heard the term frame rate. Frame rate
specifies the speed at which still images are displayed for you,
usually indicated as “frames per second” or fps. Each frame
consists of one still image. Let’s say, for example, you view a
live volleyball game on television at 30 fps. This means you
are really seeing 30 unique, still images in one second.
Surprising, right?
Why is it important to realize that video is a collection of
still frames? Because knowing this helps us understand how
we should move on camera. Although there’s not a lot of high
motion when presenting on camera or meeting with webcams,
there are still guidelines that apply. For example, professionals
inevitably use their arms and hands to gesture, not realizing
the impact it can have on viewers. For example, if we move
too fast with our bodies or gestures, the movement can become
a blur and call attention away from the central message. You
can liken this to excessive and repetitive um’s from in-person
presentations that call attention to themselves.
Because of the current frame rate with web conferencing
technologies, make your hand gestures significantly slower
when they are visible in the frame. Movement naturally grabs
our attention, but on camera, we need to slow down overall
movements to avoid jerky, distracting blurs (Figure 5-7).
Figure 5-7. Example of Blurred Gestures With Fast
Hand Movements

There’s another aspect to gesturing you should be mindful
of as well. If you have had to address a big audience on stage,
you know that you fill the space available. In person, we do
this by gesturing larger and bigger to fill the space, whether
it’s an auditorium or the TEDx stage. We move physically—
albeit staying within the red circular carpet—and we gesture
bigger. On camera in virtual training, we can still work to fill
the space. But we must be mindful of the amount of real estate
we have and how we fit into it.
When I took screen acting classes in Chicago, we were
trained to ask before filming a scene, “How big is my frame?”
Would it be an extreme close-up, a close-up, or a medium shot,
to name a few? This informed your acting. With live video, we
should still be very aware of what is in the frame and what’s
outside the frame. Are my gestures not visible because they’re
out of frame? Should I move farther away from the computer?
Where should I raise my hand gestures so they can be seen?
This is why I call it a camera frame, because it frames you.
It’s best to frame yourself before participants join on camera
to identify the height your gestures should be to stay visible in
the frame. Then learners will see them as you intended, rather
than watching your hands appear and disappear out of camera
frame. Also, remember to use gestures sparingly. Constant
gesturing creates chaotic movement that can be distracting to
viewers. Avoid using of the same gesture over and over. And
avoid pre-calculating what to do with your hands at certain
times. This can come across as artificial and disingenuous.

Instead, just let your hands naturally support what you want to
say by letting them freely move inside the camera frame.
Other Body Movements
Beyond hand gestures, there are several body movement
principles to keep in mind for virtual training. Body posture
makes a difference because everything inside the frame makes
a difference. Facilitators may not realize they’re slouching.
Imagine a string pulling you up from the top of your head.
Envisioning this should lift your posture to an upright position.
A facilitator with good posture has better breath support and
sends a message of confidence that, in turn, enhances your
credibility. Also, keep your shoulders even and balanced and
slightly lean forward to communicate you are engaged and
alert. This will help you stay relaxed, keep you grounded, and
look more natural.
If you are sitting, your movement on camera should include
slight side-to-side shifts, never front to back. The reason for
this is because as you move toward the camera (downstage),
you or your head or your hands appear to grow exceptionally
large on camera (Figure 5-8). Instead, it is best to maintain
equal proportions and keep movement in the same plane,
equidistant from the camera. When standing, try to avoid
pacing, which may cause you to move on and then off camera
while facilitating.
PRO TIP 35
Avoid significant front-to-back body movement on
camera; use slight side-to-side movements
instead.
Figure 5-8. Hands Grow Gigantic Moving Toward
Camera

A Is for Angle
You have likely seen others on webcams during virtual
training with odd camera angles. Perhaps it felt like they were
standing way above you and looking down, or their mouth
wasn’t visible because the screen cut off under their nose, or
their head was cut off from the top, or worse. These odd
camera angles can be distracting because it’s not our natural
way of viewing and interacting with others and it draws
attention to how the facilitator looks, not the content.
When you facilitate virtual training, make sure you come
across credibly and professionally with a proper camera angle.
It’s best to position your webcam to be level with your face.
This means you will need to distance yourself appropriately
from the computer. Avoid camera angles that give the
impression that learners are looking up at you as this can be an
intimidating posture. As author and social psychologist Amy
Cuddy (2015) shares in Presence: Bringing your Boldest Self
to your Biggest Challenges, when people seem or appear
bigger, it’s an expression of power and dominance. Applying
this to facilitator video, the viewer feels small and submissive
when a figure looms above them. For better rapport, move the
device, adjust your chair, or prop your computer or camera up
so that the lens is level with your hairline. Sometimes I prop
up my laptop with something sturdy so it’s even. This will
help your eyes get closer to eye-level with your camera.

Notice how in Figure 5-9, not only does the facilitator create
an intimidating posture because it feels like the learner is
looking up at them, it’s also just an awkward camera angle.
The ceiling fan doesn’t help either because it becomes a
distraction in the background. This is something I observe
more often than you might think. Sometimes, that ceiling fan
is even on, which is even more distracting because it looks like
a spinning hat.
Figure 5-9. Example of Ineffective Camera Angle
Other Awkward Angled Movement
I also recommend not facilitating with a computer in your lap
as this can cause the camera to move up and down as you type
or otherwise use the device and make learners dizzy. Instead,
make sure your device is on a flat, even, steady surface.
Another point to keep in mind with camera angles is to avoid
excess movement, such as if you are swiveling in your chair
when on camera. (Some people have been known to sit on a
large bouncy ball while they facilitate, which I don’t advise.)
We want to focus learners on the message and content, not
distract them from it.
C Is for Clothing
What virtual trainers wear on camera contributes to perceived
credibility. In the past, I’ve worked as a professional voiceover
artist and on-camera talent. In television commercials, we

would bring a selection of clothing options to wear to the
shoot, and the hired stylist or director would select the final
outfits. They often preferred those brilliant, solid blues and
greens because they popped on camera.
Solid, muted colors such as blue, teal, turquoise, green, tan,
and browns work best on camera. Solid colors are best because
they pop in the camera frame. You’ve likely observed
professional journalists and news anchors often wear solid
colors for TV broadcasts. (If you know you’re going to be
sitting the whole time and not visible elsewhere, what you
wear on the bottom can be completely up to you.) But non-
business attire is not appropriate, because as facilitator you
always want to be dressed a step above your learners. You
should look professional to enhance your credibility.
PRO TIP 36
Dress in solid colors on top, so you can visually
pop.
You also want to create a contrast that sets you apart from
your backdrop. So, wear light colors on a dark backdrop and
dark on light. This is the also the same principle that works
well developing PowerPoint slides with font color and
backgrounds. What this means is that if you’re up against a
dark background, wear a lighter, solid color. If you have a
lighter background, it would be better to wear a darker, solid
color. What I see a lot is people wearing white shirts with a
white background or a gray shirt with a gray background. This
washes you out. Instead, a blue shirt would pop nicely on a
light background.
Also avoid wearing thin stripes, busy or loud patterns, or
distracting logos. Thin stripes can appear wavy and shimmery
on camera. Large, distracting jewelry can call attention to
itself. Watch out for jewelry that is noisy when you use the
keyboard or rest your arm on the desk. I’ve advised clients in
the past to remove their watch, bracelet, or necklace if they are
very large and boisterous.
PRO TIP 37

Contrast the color of your clothing with your
background—light on dark, dark on light.
H Is for Headroom
Next, let’s touch on how to frame yourself in the camera. Most
people do not know what they don’t know when it comes to
being on camera, and this includes headroom. Face-to-face
environments offer binocular and peripheral vision. In the real
world, we have so much longitude in our ability to see near
and far, move our heads in all directions, and expand our
visual field. We even have the freedom to turn our body and
change our perspective with 360-degree movement if we so
choose.
But when we look at a frame, its two-dimensional boundary
provides closure and directs us to study everything inside the
frame. Let’s take a great piece of artwork, for example. Claude
Monet’s water lily painting invites us to take in every stroke,
color, and technique, as well as the artistry of the whole. The
framed perimeter directs our focus to everything inside the
frame.
When we look on-screen at a facilitator in a box or circle or
other shape, the two-dimensional visual window remains
constant and the border calls attention to its contents. In the
same way, when you are on camera we see you, everything to
your side and top, and everything behind you. Make sure
anything that is visible in the frame is in sync with you and
your profession. What is visible must support you and not
distract or call attention away from you.
Adjusting Headroom
It is quite common, but not advisable, to see a huge amount of
room above one’s head. Unfortunately, it is also common to
see the head cut off at the hairline. Here are a few important
tips to keep in mind about headroom. Frame yourself in the
camera by either raising your device, lowering or raising your
chair, or stacking something even and sturdy under your
device to raise it up. Ideally, you should give yourself a small
margin of space right above your head inside the frame.

Be wary of showing excessive amounts of headroom above
you as well as truncating your head at the top. Often, people
will leave most of the real estate in their camera frame to
headroom and then their head is cut off at the chin at the
bottom of the frame (Figure 5-10). In this example, all the real
estate above your head is wasted on empty space. You want to
fill the real estate in the camera frame to feature you. Ideally
you would include more than just your neck and head in the
frame. Better to see some of your upper body and hand
gestures too.
Figure 5-10. Example of Excessive Headroom
There is also such a thing as being too close to the camera.
As you’ll notice, the closer you move toward camera, the
larger your image becomes. We discussed this with movement
and hand gestures. If your face is too close to the camera,
those watching you will feel like you are up close and
personal, but this distance is usually reserved for intimate
relationships or conflict because it can feel like someone is
invading your space. To avoid this distraction, extend your
arm from where you are either standing or sitting. Your fingers
should be able to touch the screen from this distance. If not,
move back or forward to align yourself so that your fingers
just reach the screen from where you are. Sitting or standing
approximately an arm’s length away from the screen will serve
you well.

You’ll want to place yourself in the center of the webcam.
Make sure the spacing to your camera left and the spacing to
your camera right are equal. This way you don’t appear
lopsided by being too far left or too far right. Most people are
unaware of where they might be positioned in the frame.
However, it makes a difference because of how you come
across.
The Three-Finger Rule for Measuring Headroom
To properly frame yourself, use the three-finger rule as a
measurement guide. The amount of space these fingers create
is an appropriate amount of headroom to leave above your
head or from the top of your hair. Essentially, hold up your
index finger, middle finger, and ring finger together like
you’re counting to three. Lay them sideways so they are
horizontal and place them right on top of your hair or head.
Line up yourself in the frame, so that there is a three-finger
margin of space between your head and the top of the frame.
If you are using a USB external microphone, you may think
you need to be closer to the microphone, but it’s better to see
more of your body than just a head shot. Ideally, we want
learners to be able to view your head and upper body so they
can see more of you and your nonverbal movement.
Most experienced photographers learn to imagine the frame
of the photo in thirds and place items where those thirds
merge. When you are working with a webcam, centering
yourself in the middle third of the frame is a good place to
start. To help get comfortable, practice looking at yourself on
camera, as uncomfortable as this might be, so you can see
yourself as others see you.
PRO TIP 38
Center yourself in the camera frame with a small
margin of headroom using the three-finger rule as
a measurement guide.
On-Camera Participants
We’ve discussed at length how to develop your on-camera
presence as a virtual facilitator. What about your virtual

participants (Figure 5-11)? Should they also be required to be
on camera during virtual training? According to virtual
training expert Cindy Huggett’s The State of Virtual Training
2020 global survey, 55 percent of participants use webcams
during virtual training either for the entire time or part of it
(Huggett 2020).
As a guideline, you can invite or request learners turn on
their cameras, but ultimately they should be able to choose
whether to turn them on or keep them off. We are simply not
privy to all the reasons participants do not wish to come on
camera. (For example, they may have stayed up all night
finishing a project, their camera isn’t working right now, it’s
early hours in their time zone or middle of the night, or they’re
not feeling well.)
Figure 5-11. On-Camera Participants
To a certain extent, participant webcam use appears to be
influenced by what their colleagues do. For example, nearly 70
percent of respondents in FSU’s webcam research study
reported feeling pressured to turn their cameras on when other
people did (Dennen, Word, and Arslan 2021). But note that the
study also found that as the size of the virtual event increases,
“fewer people are comfortable having their webcams on.”
Another reason to allow participants to remain off camera is
because of screen fatigue. A compromise can be to give them
advance notice before training day to be camera-ready on their

top half and invite them to be on camera for certain parts, like
introductions and breakouts. As facilitators, be cognizant that
we unconsciously tend to focus more on participants we can
see on camera, and it’s human to sometimes forget to call on
or talk directly to those we cannot see. We must make a note to
deliberately include those we cannot see on-screen. So, when
you ask a discussion question, make sure you call on others
who are not on camera first to balance airtime with those who
are. You might ask, for example, “Jon, we haven’t heard from
you yet. What are your thoughts?”
Individuals who know they are expected to be on camera
tend to take two distinct actions before the live event. In FSU’s
2021 webcam study, respondents said that if they anticipated
they would be on camera, they would spend more time
grooming 
beforehand 
and 
tidying 
their 
workspace
surroundings. In fact, 82 percent of the more than 500
respondents said they groomed more carefully beforehand, and
79 percent said they tidied their surroundings first (Figure 5-
12; Dennen, Word, and Arslan 2021).
Figure 5-12. Grooming and Tidying Affect the Decision
to Be On Camera
Grooming and tidying workspaces are just two factors
affecting a person’s decision to turn on the camera.
Respondents were also asked what their decision was
influenced by, whether they were in virtual training, meetings,
or online in general, and the top reason was the individual’s

degree of involvement in the live event. Other factors included
what others do, attention, how many people were there or class
size, and other related factors. Reference Figure 5-13 for
percentages by factors.
Figure 5-13. Other Factors Affecting the Decision to Be
On Camera
For these reasons, if you know you’ll invite participants to
come on camera during the parts of the training that are most
relational (such as introductions, group discussions, and
breakouts), set those expectations for participants well before
class day. For example, you could communicate this either
through your LMS’s automated messages, instructor welcome
video, or pre-class email. In more robust virtual training
programs where you meet multiple times over the course of
several weeks or months, it’s important to invite all to come on
camera for initial introductions to build those relationships.
Inviting—although not forcing—participants to come on
camera for introductions can help to facilitate relationship
building.
If, however, learners are working on the interactive
whiteboard collectively or annotating on slides, you may invite
them to turn off their cameras. Do share the rationale with
them: to help them focus on the whiteboard or slides. To
decide whether to encourage participants to turn their cameras
on, ask yourself where their attention focus should be. If there
is too much competing with the primary focus of an extended
whiteboard activity, for example, you can invite them to turn
cameras off. However, we also don’t want to incur webcam
whiplash by turning them on and off again repeatedly. Use

your discretion to invite them to turn on cameras for extended
activities like breakouts or large group discussions. Then,
invite them to turn cameras off so they can focus better on the
slide content, if they’re annotating slides, or when you are
explaining complex material. It is the responsibility of the
virtual trainer to gently suggest when it might be a good time
to go on or off camera and why.
Summary
Overall, establishing a sense of facilitator presence and place
is an essential capability for virtual trainers. One of the main
ways we can effectively project this is through our on-camera
competence. As we have seen, there are many aspects that
contribute to building professionalism and rapport through
effective webcam use. These include instructor framing,
nonverbal on-camera cues, and technical aspects such as audio
quality and lighting. Because there are so many distractions
that compete with learners’ attention in today’s modern
learning environments, focused attention is critical. And so, it
is our responsibility to do everything we can to eliminate and
minimize distractions with video technology and leverage it as
a relationship-building and connection tool to support our
learners’ virtual journey.
Ultimately, we want to be on camera with proper lighting,
background, and framing during purposeful connection
moments. These are the times when the focus is interpersonal
connection. This can help to effectively establish a facilitator’s
presence for learners. Also, remember to use the acronym
BLEACH to help you remember to clean up how you come
across in the camera frame: B for Background; L for Lighting;
E for Expressions; A for Angle; C for Clothing; and H for
Headroom. In the next chapter, we will continue to build on
this capability by exploring the various elements of vocal
delivery. Projecting through live video and audio work
together to establish a sense of place and presence for learners.
All these components build toward a proficiency and
competency in these areas.

So, the next time you are on camera and training others
virtually, remind yourself that you are connecting with real
people in real time, across space and distance. They just
happen to be … on the other side of the camera.
Pro Tips for Developing
Facilitator Presence through On-
Camera Competence
TIP
30
Minimize or remove visual distractions from view in the camera
frame.
TIP
31
Select a virtual backdrop that does not call attention to itself.
TIP
32
Light yourself from the front with plenty of soft, even lighting.
TIP
33
Be facially expressive in a natural way to aid learning.
TIP
34
Adjust yourself to be more eye level with the camera, and
when instructionally feasible, look directly at the camera lens.
TIP
35
Avoid significant front-to-back body movement on camera; use
slight side-to-side movements instead.
TIP
36
Dress in solid colors on top, so you can visually pop.
TIP
37
Contrast the color of your clothing with your background—light
on dark, dark on light.
TIP
38
Center yourself in the camera frame with a small margin of
headroom using the three-finger rule as a measurement guide.

“Be congruent in body and voice.”
—Elaine Biech, talent development expert and author

Enhancing Facilitator
Presence Through Audio
and Vocal Delivery
It was a small virtual training class, only eight or nine learners
(including me) and the facilitator. Our facilitator was a
gentleman located in a big city in the US, and I remember
when he turned on his video camera, he showed us the view
out his window from a skyscraper. But what I remember most
from that class was his genuine and enthusiastic voice. He
spoke in a lower range. He emphasized certain words. When
he said, “We’re going to have fun today,” he meant it. He
varied the rate at which he spoke by slowing down in
important places and speeding up in less critical points. He
also was extremely conversational and called on us
occasionally as he reviewed the assignments we had turned in
from the last live online class with him.
In virtual training, you can do without certain tools or a
missing worksheet, but your vocal instrument is irreplaceable.
So why is it that as facilitators of virtual training, we take our
voice for granted? Well, we use it every day, all day. However,
we often give more attention to the technology operation than
our vocal performance. It may be tempting to think we should
not have to think twice about speaking, much less view it as a
skill to professionally develop. Nothing could be farther from
the truth. Your voice is one of the most powerful instruments
you possess as a facilitator.
In virtual learning spaces, your voice is even more
important than in the traditional classroom. With in-person

classrooms, participants are privy to many visual cues in
addition to an auditory voice. These cues help learners
interpret the meaning of your words. But virtually, there are
fewer visual, nonverbal, and physical cues available to
interpret. This makes learners more reliant on the anchor of
voice to develop a sense of the facilitator’s presence.
In this chapter, we continue with the capability of facilitator
presence, which helps learners gain a sense of the person
they’re being led by and the place where they are located
(because learners are often curious about where facilitators are
connecting from). In chapter 5, we discussed how you can
effectively manage your on-camera presence. Now, we’ll
cover this capability from the angle of how to develop voice
proficiency and ensure good audio quality. If done well,
facilitator presence conveys a sense of sharing a space
regardless of time or geographical distance. When you
successfully pair voice and camera, you might even hear
participants say, “I feel like we’re really together.”
In this chapter, we’ll explore vocal elements, global
languages, verbal messaging, paraverbal messaging, vocal
care, and audio equipment. Let’s dive in!
THE BIG IDEA
Enhance your online presence as facilitator by
elevating the quality of your audio and vocal
delivery.
Audio Distractions in Virtual Training
Audio is an integral part of live online learning. Yet one of the
most common challenges with virtual training is getting the
audio right. As most audio visual specialists agree, poor audio
can be even worse than poor video. This is an instance where
rationalizing that your “sound is good enough” can have a
serious negative influence on the training. If learners are not
able to hear you well because of static, echoes, feedback,
background sounds, or other noises, this can distract learners.
Additionally, large pieces of jewelry hitting the desk,
accidentally tapping your desk with your hand, or even the

noise your headset cord can make when you turn your head
can all be easily picked up by a microphone. All these
distractions call attention away from where the focus of
learning should be. In addition, ambient noise can present
serious challenges to people who are hard of hearing or
neurodivergent. Take this under consideration when using
elements such as background music in videos, as well, since
this may make it harder for those with hearing impairment to
discern your speech.
Back in the early days of virtual training, we used a landline
telephone to connect with audio and then a separate
connection via the internet for the virtual training platform.
Computer audio, or Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP), was
available then but far inferior in quality. Today, computer
audio has far surpassed other audio options for virtual training.
However, that doesn’t mean ambient noise is always
automatically eliminated during your live online learning
sessions.
At one time, when I was near the end of facilitating a virtual
training class from my home office, a neighbor’s tree specialist
crew arrived and proceeded to chop down some rather large
trees with extremely noisy equipment right next to us.
Fortunately, my husband was home that day and had the
awareness to run outside and ask politely if they would mind
waiting another 10 minutes before they continued and
explained why. Luckily, they agreed. Thanks to his quick
thinking, my virtual training concluded with just that brief
disruption.
Thanks to noise-cancelling audio equipment and today’s
virtual training platforms, this is much more manageable.
Fortunately, some virtual training platforms like Cisco Webex
allow you to silence ambient noise like pets, kids, and even
keyboard typing sounds. If you do not have the luxury of a
virtual training platform that removes background noise, find a
space to facilitate your virtual training class that is a quiet and
free from distraction. For example, I always shut my windows
and home office door to minimize any unwanted background
noises when facilitating a virtual class. Do what you can to
control the noise in your environment. If working from home,

place pets in other rooms, shut your office door (if you have
one), and alert others in your living space about when they
should be extra quiet and why. Place a sign that says “Do Not
Disturb—Class in Session” on the closed door to your room or
reserve a separate conference room away from your work area
in the office.
Once, I was training a virtual class in the middle of a winter
night in my time zone because my learners were international
participants and it was daytime for them. I was using an
external microphone, and my home office at the time
happened to be in a finished basement. Midway through the
session, my furnace turned on. The heat vents were in the
ceiling directly above my desk and the metal in the vents
reverberated loudly and distractingly when the furnace was on.
So, when I gave my virtual attendees a break, I ran upstairs to
turn down the heat. I learned from that point on to warm up
the basement first and then turn the heat down right before
training sessions to avoid the constant noise interference. This
is an example of how virtual trainers need to adapt quickly to
unforeseen circumstances and how they need to thoroughly
think through their environments to anticipate possible
distractions. Do your best to first predict, then minimize, and,
when possible, eliminate competing noise.
While most of this chapter focuses on your voice in virtual
training, it’s important to also touch on the voices of your
learners. Some virtual training practitioners recommend
participants stay muted during live online learning. What you
need to remember though, is that muting can also inhibit
conversation. If you have a smaller class (10 or fewer) and
they do not have a lot of background noise in their
environments, you can ask them to keep their microphones on.
As noises emerge, they can mute as needed. This allows for
more fluid conversation. Even when you have a large class, for
small group discussions like breakouts, ask participants to
remain unmuted, if possible, to keep the conversation flowing
naturally. Pre-class instructions should be sent to all
participants encouraging them to find a quiet space free from
distractions to attend the training, as we established earlier in
chapter 3. This can help set the stage for muting less often.

Again, this is primarily important for those in an environment
with ambient noise where you want to be careful not to disrupt
the flow of the live session.
PRO TIP 39
If your virtual training platform does not have the
ability to silence ambient noise, use noise-
cancelling headsets or an external mic in a quiet
space.
Vocal Elements
Our voices can communicate several things in a variety of
ways. For example, they can communicate enthusiasm or lack
thereof, inflection, rate of speech, and more. It is often the
energy in our voice and passion for the topic that can inspire
others.
To aid your growth as a professional facilitator, the rest of
this chapter helps you be more vocally aware. Together, let’s
explore various components of voice and tips for effective
delivery. Some schools of thought divide voice between
language and paralanguage. Language, of course, is the words
we use, and paralanguage includes all the other ways we
communicate without words; for example, nonverbal gestures,
body movement, and tone. In our virtual training context, we
will focus specifically on the verbal (what we say) and
paraverbal (how we say it) elements.
Global Languages
First, I want to touch on a universal consideration for
international audiences. Over the last decade, our virtual
classes have become increasingly global with participants
attending from multiple countries. If you work for an
organization with several locations around the globe, this
influences the words you choose and your rate of speech as a
virtual facilitator. For example, you may facilitate virtual
sessions in a language with non-native speakers located in
other countries. If you facilitate in English, Darlene
Christopher (2011) of World Bank recommends doing your

best to use international English that is free from slang,
idioms, and other references unique to one country or another.
Overall, it is helpful to speak slower, enunciate more
clearly, and use plain language easily understood by all. If
learners do not recognize the spoken words, they cannot
ascertain their meaning. Another option is to use a virtual
training platform that automatically provides live translations
in multiple languages. Virtual platforms like Digitell offer
automated closed captioning services that provide language
translations for learners, who can select from multiple
language options. Webex and Microsoft Teams also provide
closed captioning and language translation. Offering live
language translation in virtual training platforms will continue
to become more widespread. This is a very important
accessibility feature for individuals who are deaf and hard-of-
hearing as well.
Verbal Messaging
Even though we likely take our verbal delivery for granted,
there are several nuances that can help us be more vocally
effective when facilitating live online classes. To improve
vocal delivery in virtual training, we can focus on breath
support, pausing, rate, pronunciation, enunciation, emphasis,
inflection, and more. One research study from Amsterdam,
Netherlands, and Canada examined the skills for successful
synchronous 
facilitation 
and 
identified 
necessary
communication skills that included “clear, appropriately
paced, engaging and articulate speech” (Phelps and
Vlachopoulos 2020).
One of the best ways to get a sense of your vocal delivery is
to record one of your virtual training sessions and listen to the
playback without watching the visual part. Close your eyes
and listen to the audio of as if you were a learner. This is a
unique opportunity to understand how others might experience
your facilitation. Almost everyone finds it difficult to listen to
themselves, but if you do so with a trusted confidante, they can
also help point out opportunities for improvement. Celebrate
your strengths and be open to areas for professional growth.

Some of us use excessive vocalized pauses, other talk too fast,
and still others unintentionally swallow consonants.
In this section on verbal messaging, we’ll tackle the
following topics:
• Breath support
• Vocalized pauses
• Brief pausing
• Speaking rate
• Pronunciation
• Enunciation
Breath Support
The voice is all about breath. We would not be able to speak
without breath support. The greater the breath support, the
more resonant and powerful your voice will be. Breath comes
up from the abdominal areas in our diaphragm to vibrate your
vocal cords in the larynx (your voice box). Tongue placement
and how we shape our mouths then forms consonants and
vowels that become our speech. When we fully support our
voices with breath and a relaxed larynx, magic happens when
we facilitate online.
You may be accustomed to projecting good volume during
in-person classes, but even when you facilitate virtually,
ensure that your breath support is still coming from your
diaphragm. This way you will have more air behind your
voice. And if you have more air, you have more control. To
ensure you are breathing properly from your diaphragm, try
this experiment. When you go to bed tonight, lay on your back
and place your hand on your lower abdomen. Observe how
your body naturally breathes. When you lie on your back, your
body will naturally breathe in this fully supported way. Use
this awareness to inform supported breathing when you
facilitate virtual training events. Alternatively, if you notice
your shoulders rising and falling when you speak and train
online, this is shallow breathing. This is designed for quick

breaths like after exercising when you need to catch your
breath.
Body alignment also makes a difference vocally. Sit or stand
upright when you facilitate virtual training, with your
shoulders back and a straight posture. This allows you to best
support your sound and can also help provide an energy boost
as your voice rises and moves out.
PRO TIP 40
With upright posture, breathe from your
diaphragm when you facilitate online.
Vocalized Pauses
Vocalized pauses are the filler words we use habitually to fill
awkward silence. We use them because we are uncomfortable
with silence. They fill the gap while we think of what we want
to say next when speaking. They’re formally called vocalized
pauses because you vocalize where you really should pause.
It is common in many languages to use filler words between
sentences. These filler words become so entrenched that the
more we repeat them, the more they’re reinforced. With more
heightened awareness—which is the first step to reducing
them—you may begin to recognize vocalized pauses you
already use in your native language. In the English language,
for example, some common filler words are “um,” “uh,”
“like,” “right,” “so,” and “OK.”
Because vocalized pauses are common, using them is not
completely taboo. Occasional vocalized pauses interspersed
throughout your facilitation is fine. However, when used
excessively, they can draw learners’ attention away from
content and become distracting. It becomes problematic when
learners begin paying attention to the vocalized pauses instead
of listening to what you’re saying. This is especially the case
when learners start counting how many ums you say rather
than what you are saying.
As facilitators, work to minimize vocal distractions with the
following steps. First, identify your unique filler word. We all
have idiosyncrasies and usually have a few filler words that

we tend to repeat over and over. It’s very likely your over-used
filler word is very different from mine. Because you might not
even know what filler words you use or if you have any, there
are two ways you can identify them. One way is to listen to the
audio of a recorded virtual training session you led. This will
be eye-opening for you. I realize people rarely want to see or
hear recordings of themselves, but it is honestly the best way
to learn what needs to be improved. This gives you the unique
opportunity to sit in the shoes of your learners and experience
what they do. Another way to identify your unique filler words
is to ask a trusted colleague to watch a recording or sit in on
one of your virtual training sessions to listen specifically to
your speech patterns for the sake of professional improvement.
The second step to becoming aware of what unique fillers
you use is to ask a trusted colleague to listen for frequency.
Rehearse your virtual training while your colleague logs into
the platform to listen to you. Speak from your notes as you
normally would and accelerate through the learning activities
where learners would normally be doing something. Then,
every time you say your filler word, they can raise their virtual
hand. This way you can get a sense of frequency and whether
it’s excessive.
The third step is to catch yourself either right before you try
to use the vocalized pause or while you’re doing it. To change
this behavior, you first need to replace it with something. For
example, every time you are tempted to use “so,” “like,” or
“um,” you can swallow instead, if it’s comfortable to do so. Or
you can close your lips instead and make a short hum as a
replacement behavior. You will learn very quickly how
frequently you might be tempted to use a filler word.
From here, the ultimate goal, of course, is to phase out the
swallowing, closing lips together, or brief hum replacement
behaviors and instead permanently replace them with a silent
pause.
PRO TIP 41
Work to eventually replace vocalized pauses with
a real pause.

Brief Pausing
Pauses are an inherent part of nature’s rhythm. In the physical
world, there are many polarities: day and night, action and
rest, sound and silence. Pausing is natural.
There are also times to speak and times to pause. For
example, as you are facilitating virtual training class, you may
try to compress a lot of information into a brief speaking time:
“So that wraps up this section on how you can identify
priorities at work. What questions do you have? I know this
can be challenging when it feels like you have a million
projects hitting you at once. OK, so next we want to address
SMART goals. Has anyone written these before?”
It can be easy to be so focused on what you need or want to
say that you forget to pause and allow participants to process
what you’ve just said. Intersperse pauses after questions and
even when you transition to subtopics. As author Darlene
Christopher (2015) points out, participants need time to
process thoughts, type responses in chat (and even more time
if typing in a second language), and time to remember how to
un-mute their audio connection to speak. Thankfully, many
platforms now provide more attention-getting reminders when
either a learner or facilitator forgets to unmute and
inadvertently speaks while muted.
Our own physical bodies provide a helpful metaphor. When
your body is in the rest and digest stage, your digestion system
works better. In contrast, when you eat in a state of high stress,
this is not helpful for digestion. Likewise, for learners to best
digest content, absorb new concepts, and connect to their prior
knowledge, providing pauses as a brief “rest period” can help
facilitate this. Briefly pausing while facilitating not only helps
learners process what was just said, but also reminds you to
slow your rate. Leverage brief, natural pauses as you facilitate
live online learning. Purposeful silence has a place.
PRO TIP 42
Pause briefly between sentences to create space
for learners to process what you just said.

As mentioned previously in chapter 4, silence is called dead
air in radio broadcasting. Some practitioners suggest it is to be
avoided at all costs with virtual training. Extended,
unannounced silence makes us think something went wrong,
such as a technical difficulty. Although this is certainly true for
radio, virtual learning is not radio. When you ask a question,
and there is only silence, it just means you need to wait a little
longer for the first person to speak up. Sometimes this means
holding your tongue or placing yourself on mute. Brief silence
commands attention and allows for learners to think of how to
respond.
Speaking Rate
Movement naturally captures our attention, as we explore
more deeply in chapter 8. So, how might this influence our
vocal delivery as facilitators? When a virtual trainer says
several phrases rapidly and then slows to deliver a different
phrase more slowly, what happens to the learner’s attention?
This subtle change, varying the speaking rate, draws attention
to the novelty of the speech pattern. For example, the virtual
trainer might say quickly, “Everyone, scroll to page 11 in your
digital workbook. Let’s focus next on the four types of
behavioral styles.” Then you might slow down as you explain
what each of those four main styles are.
Have your virtual training evaluations ever pointed out that
you talk too fast? Perhaps that feedback surprised you. Some
people are naturally fast talkers, and think their speaking rate
is fine; it’s as normal as breathing. This is understandable. Fast
talkers are conditioned over a lifetime of speaking. In my
experience, fast talkers are often also fast thinkers. The
downside to this is that learners may be left behind. If you
speak rapid-fire during a virtual training session (especially
without pauses), your learners will soon tire of the accelerated
pace. They simply cannot keep up, and as a result, they may
disengage and start doing other things.
Participant attention is a precious commodity and essential
to learning. We do everything we can to minimize distraction

and appropriately direct attention. So, how might this be
remedied?
If you try to remind yourself to slow down, it might work
initially but eventually you will find you are back to the races
again (that’s conditioning!). However, there is a solution that
works even better. If you are a natural fast talker, slow your
rate by speaking in phrases—not sentences. This new rhythm
will naturally slow your pace. Speak a phrase, pause very
briefly, speak a phrase, pause very briefly, and so on. You can
even leave yourself notes on your monitor to remind you to do
so. Yes, it will take practice to recondition yourself over time,
but it works. Do not separate every word, just insert a brief
pause after a short, spoken phrase. Deliberately slowing your
speaking rate also gives non-native speakers more time to
recognize, translate, and understand what you are saying.
For example, in your virtual training session, let’s imagine
you say the following as an instruction before a breakout
activity: “You will need to read the scenario in your participant
guide and designate one person in your group to summarize
the actions you decide to take to address this situation.” To
slow your rate by speaking in phrases, you would instead say,
“You will need to read the scenario—in your participant guide
—and designate one person in your group—to summarize the
actions you decide to take—to address this situation.” This
way, your rate of speech is organically slowed down because
you are speaking in phrases. Be wary of sounding too robotic
though; keep that conversational style.
Also, do a self-check before you begin a virtual session to
gauge your state of being. Be wary of adopting an accelerated
speech rate if you feel like you have a lot of material to cover,
feel behind schedule, or sense that you don’t have a lot of
time. It is never worth it to rush. Learners will pick up on your
nervous energy and feel rushed too. This even shows up on
evaluations as the feedback, “felt rushed.” Breathe in slowly,
breathe out slowly, and remind yourself that a non-rushed pace
is better for participants and learning.
PRO TIP 43

To slow speaking rate, speak in phrases—not
sentences.
Pronunciation
Pronunciation is speaking a word correctly with the
appropriate emphasis according to the cultural norms for
saying that word. If you are facilitating in a non-native
language or are unsure of how to pronounce certain words
before you train, there are many apps and YouTube videos
available to help you.
When I facilitated a virtual training session with participants
from Japan, I held the session in the evening in my time zone,
so it would be daytime for my learners. The client informed
me that they also spoke English and I could train in English. I
do not speak Japanese, but I knew the importance of
pronouncing their names correctly. And, as we discussed in
chapters 3 and 4, I also knew the importance of using
participant names throughout the training. As a result, I
enlisted the help of a Japanese teacher from my family’s
school at the time. This high school teacher graciously agreed
to create an audio recording of how to say each of my
participants’ names from a class roster. I listened to her
recording beforehand and wrote out their names with notes on
emphasis and syllables to remind myself how to pronounce
them. This way, I was able to say their names aloud with
confidence when I affirmed their comments in chat or when
they came off mute to share. I was only on camera at the
beginning of the session, so I was able to check my roster and
notes on pronunciation frequently without them seeing me
look down. I had an expedient way to recognize their name in
chat and then could call attention to it aloud.
If you are not sure how to pronounce something during your
rehearsals, look it up online to hear playbacks of certain words
so you can feel confident saying them.
Enunciation
Enunciation is different than pronunciation. Enunciation
means clearly articulating consonants and vowels. If you have

been told that you do not clearly articulate all your words or
that you swallow some of your consonants, it could be that
you are holding back air or not fully shaping sound with your
mouth. For most virtual trainers, if you have conditioned
speech patterns such as slurring certain consonants when you
speak, you can discover them by recording one of your virtual
training sessions and listening to the playback.
Your speech can also be affected by your thoughts. For
example, if you’re trying to hide a lisp, you don’t like the
quality of your voice, or you’re just trying to get to the finish
line of your virtual training session, it will affect your speech.
Be proud of your voice and let it shine. The prescriptive tip
about speaking in phrases will not only slow your speech rate
but can also help with enunciation and inflection too.
You can also practice over-articulating certain consonants or
words before your virtual class begins to warm up your
enunciation if you are someone who may not articulate as
clearly. Ideally, we want to hear all vowels and consonants to
correctly interpret the words you speak and their meaning as
you intended.
PRO TIP 44
Vary your rate of vocal delivery for emphasis and
as an attention-getting technique.
Now that we have addressed the verbal aspect of vocal
delivery, let’s focus on the paraverbal elements.
Paraverbal Messaging
A key part of your vocal message as an online facilitator is
what you say. However, how you say what you say can even
be more important. As discussed earlier, verbal delivery is
what you say and the paraverbal is how you say it. I used to
work as a professional voiceover talent and on-camera talent
for commercials, multimedia productions, film, and other
media. We used many techniques as voiceover artists to be
effective and create interest. Many of these elements can also
improve your delivery as a virtual trainer or online facilitator.
Let’s take a closer look at each:

• Tone
• Conversational style
• Nervousness
• Pitch
• Vocal inflection
• Energy
Tone
Think about when you last visited the grocery store or an open
produce market. At the end of the transaction, did the
merchant say, “Thanks. Have a good day”? If you isolate those
words by themselves, they are pleasant enough. But what
happens when those words are said to you with an apathetic
tone? Immediately, you know the merchant doesn’t mean it,
and is not wishing you a good day. When there is a mismatch
between what someone says and how they say it, we
instinctually know to not believe the message. Thus, how we
say something can either negate or reinforce what we say.
When we apply this to virtual training, remember that
everything you say is more powerful when the how and the
what are in sync. If they’re not, your tone will negate the
meaning of your words. For example, if at the start of a virtual
training session you say, “I’m excited to be here and to have
all of you here,” but your tone communicates you aren’t
excited at all, you just cancelled the message’s meaning. You
also missed a window of opportunity to build credible rapport.
Learners can tell when tone contradicts your message. They
also know to believe tone over words when they’re in conflict,
and they’re right to do so.
As a live online facilitator, be genuine and speak
authentically. When you facilitate live online learning, listen
carefully to how you say what you say. There is an element of
more taxed listening required of you here. Another way you
can help yourself is to listen for your own use of emotionally
charged phrases like “My pleasure,” “No problem,” or “That’s
great.” If you assist someone in the training class and then you

say, “My pleasure” but your tone sounds like “That was a
waste of time,” we know it certainly wasn’t your pleasure. If
you say, “No problem,” but you sound irritated, your tone will
communicate that instead. And if a learner shares something
and you say “That’s great,” but your tone makes it sound like
you really don’t care, once again, your tone negates your
verbal message.
There are some awareness questions you can ask yourself to
be more attuned and in sync. Ask yourself, “How am I coming
across?” “What is my tone?” Check your tone by watching the
visual expressions of your participants on video or by
intentionally listening to hear if how you say something is in
sync with what you say. The biggest tip is to be real and
genuine. If you really are excited to be there and you say that
at the front-end, your tone will naturally convey your
excitement. If you say, “I can’t wait to show you all the great
goal setting tips we’re going to learn today” and you don’t
mean it, learners can tell as well and they’ll match your lack of
enthusiasm.
Conversational Style
At some point, you likely have attended virtual training where
the facilitator read verbatim from a script. From a virtual
trainer perspective, we understand why this might be tempting.
Quite simply, it’s easier—but it is not best practice. Everything
is thought out ahead of time and written down exactly the way
it should be elegantly said. This way, you do not have to worry
about finding the right words in the moment. When this
happens in the context of virtual training, however, learners
either check their smartphones, send text messages, shop
online, or drift away.
When we speak during live online learning, it should not
sound rote or like we’re reading verbatim. Learners do not
want a monologue. Instead, to be most effective, use a
conversational speaking style. Speak in dialogue, not a
monologue. I recommend you not read a script as a virtual
facilitator, unless you have the very rare ability to sound like
you are not reading. Sometimes, I will script my closing

statements to make sure I hit all the points, because let’s face
it, at the end of a virtual training, you’re tired and may not be
at your eloquent best anymore. But I do work hard to make it
sound spontaneous and conversational regardless.
Speaking in a conversational style is also supported by
evidence-based research for most effective learning. Richard
Mayer coined the term personalization principle based on his
leading multimedia studies. This principle states that people
learn better from a conversational style than a formal style
(Mayer 2014). Conversational style means you’re speaking
extemporaneously and choosing the words you use at the time
that you speak them. It should also feel like we’re sitting in
your living room having a conversation—albeit, hopefully an
energetic conversation.
PRO TIP 45
Speak with a conversational style using informal
language.
Another way to speak in a conversational tone is to use
personal pronouns like “you,” “us,” “we,” and “let’s,” which
makes it feel more like the speaker is talking directly to
participants (Mayer 2014). Using first- and second-person
pronouns when we facilitate aids learning. When pronouns
such as he, she, or they are used, learners tend not to pay as
much attention. With second-person pronouns and a
conversational speaking style, however, learners pay more
attention because it feels like the facilitator is talking directly
to them. Remember, if someone speaks directly to you, you
listen.
One tip that helps me be more conversational is to allow my
hands to gesture naturally when I speak. Hand gestures are a
natural part of organic communication. I’ve noticed they also
encourage more vocal variety, inflection, emphasis, and many
of the other elements we discuss in this chapter. Just as when a
violinist, pianist, or vocalist might use their body language to
move to the music as they perform, when the whole body is in
sync with communication, it naturally boosts our overall
effectiveness. Experiment with this technique for yourself to
see if your speaking style becomes even more conversational.

There is much research to support the value of
conversational style in learning, and how it creates heightened
listening on the part of the learner. As Ruth Clark (2020)
advises from consistent evidence-based research, you can
“promote deeper learning by addressing learners in a
conversational manner using first- and second-person and
polite phrases.” This demonstrates that live online facilitators
should absolutely speak in a conversational style because it is
more effective for learning.
PRO TIP 46
Intentionally use personal pronouns to promote
deeper learning.
Nervousness
When we are nervous while facilitating, it is normal for there
to be shakiness in our voice or to sound out of breath. As a
physiological reaction to stress, your heart may start to beat
faster, which causes you to breathe faster. However, if you
breathe from your belly, you will have greater breath support,
especially if you’re nervous. When we experience stress, we
tend to unknowingly hold tension in parts of our body,
including our vocal cords. When we are nervous, this tension
cuts off our full breath support and could cause us to speak
softer or in a higher, strained pitch.
To help remain calm, try a set of three repetitions of a
breathing exercise before your virtual training class begins.
Inhale for four counts in through your nose, and exhale for
eight counts through your mouth. Physiologically, your body
will realize it is not in danger if your breathing is slow and
steady. This is how you trigger the rest and digest state, instead
of the fight or flight response.
Additionally, rolling your shoulders can help to relax your
body. Humor, of course, is a great way to release tension, and
yawning can also be a healthy release. Sometimes, chatting
with your producer ahead of time after the platform is prepped
and ready to go can help you relax and settle in before
participants arrive.

Pitch
There is a wide variety of voices and speaking styles among
individuals. Some speak with high-pitch ranges, others have
lower voices, while still others are somewhere in between.
Without having to sacrifice your own speaking style or change
your voice, you can still benefit from finding a pitch range that
is most comfortable for learners listening to you.
For those with high pitches, my recommendation is to
become comfortable with your full range, especially your
lower register. One easy tip for finding the lowest part of your
register is to pretend like you’re answering a question. When
someone asks you if you’re a virtual facilitator and you say
“uh-huh” as a yes, you will discover that you usually answer
in the lower part of your register. From there, continue to
speak, allowing your voice to drop deep into your belly and
with supported breath speak from this place. Ideally, it’s best
to use more of your vocal range, high and low, which
introduces variety and helps garner interest. For those with
boomy bass voices, you also want to strike a balance with
variety and use more of your range with natural inflection.
Maintaining a balanced voice can also contribute to credibility.
If you record one of your virtual training sessions and listen
to the playback, you may notice other patterns. For example,
some online facilitators have a pattern of speech where, at the
end of every sentence, their voice rises as if they were asking a
question. This rising inflection can inaccurately and
unintentionally communicate insecurity or that they’re asking
a question when they’re not. While in Western cultures, it’s
appropriate for the pitch to go higher when you ask a question,
and it’s better to let the pitch of your voice drop at the end of a
sentence. This, of course, depends on your culture and native
language, as many intonations can change the meaning of
words across different languages, which provide exceptions.
Vocal Inflection
As Aristotle wrote well over 2,000 years ago, the right
management of the voice “to express the various emotions”
with varying pitch and rhythms suitable to various subjects

“we cannot do without.” In other words, we need inflection.
Inflection is the movement of our voice using a variety of
pitches (low, middle, and high). Have you ever noticed that
when a person’s pitch stays the same when they talk, you tune
out? We are wired to notice things that do not stay the same.
Again, the magic is in the mix. As online facilitators, we want
to strive for variety with inflection.
One of the most popular radio shows from old-time radio
was The Shadow. It first aired in the 1930s and ran until 1954
as a 30-minute program. It’s worth asking why audiences were
so riveted for decades by only audio. One potential reason is
because of how much the characters used inflection, especially
in the main character’s trademark laugh. Their voices went up
and down in pitch and used emphasis and varying rates.
Even when we are not on camera during virtual training,
using a variety of inflection can still help hold your learners’
attention. When coaching one of my clients who later taught
both virtually and in-person, we recorded his vocal delivery.
As we listened to the playback together, I asked him to draw a
diagram of how much inflection he heard in his delivery. I
drew a diagram too. When we compared our drawings at the
end, we were surprised to see that they looked almost
identical. We had both mostly drawn a static line with a few
small ups and downs. This was a great way to illustrate what
he had not realized before. It was a great segue for us to begin
incorporating more inflection into his vocal delivery for his
learners’ benefit.
Monotone is the opposite of inflection. This is when
someone’s pitch stays relatively the same while they speak. If
we facilitate with monotone delivery, it is underwhelming for
learners, and they will tune out quickly. Monotone delivery
certainly does not help you connect with learners.
If you tend to facilitate with little inflection, one technique
you can experiment with is rehearsing to music. Music
naturally rises and falls. During rehearsal, play instrumental
music that rises and falls to encourage yourself to use more
fluctuation in your own voice. However, the inflection should
not be contrived. When I used to record voiceover narrations

in studios, sometimes the sound engineer would play the
music track for me that would be added later for the final
production. Doing a practice read with the music playing in
my ears helped me create more energy and inflection, so that
when we did the final recording, the takes were so much
better.
One classic exercise you can do to help generate more
inflection is to think about saying “yes” in different ways.
First, say “yes” like you are angry, then surprised, then
shocked, then sad, then bored, then happy. When you
exaggerate this skill at first, it can be a venue to help you
explore more inflection in your own voice and then start
incorporating it in your virtual training sessions.
PRO TIP 47
To create more interest, vary your vocal inflection.
Energy
According to Darlene Christopher in The Successful Virtual
Classroom (2015), learners can read a facilitator’s level of
energy from their voice, and whether to be interested in a topic
because of what the facilitator projects. Our voices reveal
energetic levels. The best virtual facilitators are energetic,
enthusiastic, and passionate. Perhaps you have seen “great
energy” typed on your evaluations for virtual training. Smiling
can also convey a more pleasant and energetic tone for
facilitators. Learners can hear the smile in your voice even if
you’re off camera.
Energy is contagious. If you watch videos of people
laughing on YouTube for approximately four minutes, I
guarantee you will be smiling, if not laughing by the end.
Why? Because you have mirror neurons in your brain. When
you see someone else smiling, you smile. When someone else
yawns, you yawn. When someone else laughs, you laugh.
When you facilitate online, if you bring positive energy, your
learners feel it. The inverse is also true. If you bring negative
energy to your synchronous sessions, your learners feel this
too.

I advise virtual facilitators to generate twice the energy they
would normally have when they are training. There are two
main reasons for this. First, energy takes a hit when it is
transmitted through technology either via computer audio or
the virtual training platform. Second, we are not able to play
off the natural energy we would normally experience with an
in-room dynamic—think of the energy level of the audience at
an in-person stand-up comedy show, for example. Therefore,
we must work harder to convey energy transmitted through
technology and multimedia. Facilitating a session while
standing instead of sitting may also help you deliver with more
energy.
I used to drive my father to special sessions at Gilda’s Club
where they generously provided emotional support, cancer
education, and hope to those fighting cancer. On one such
occasion, I dropped him off for a laughter class. My father
knew intuitively that there was something to the axiom,
“laughter is the best medicine.” When I returned to pick him
up an hour or so later, to my surprise, the entire class was
uproariously belly laughing—including my father. I could not
help but smile when I walked in. His energy had spread to me
instantly. As I drove my father home, I asked him what was so
funny, and he smiled and said, “I have no idea.” There was so
much positive energy in that room, and all those mirror
neurons were at work.
Obviously, I’m not suggesting we make our virtual learners
belly laugh during a virtual session, unless, of course, that
happens naturally. The point is that your energy—positive or
negative—is contagious. It emanates from your presence,
personality, and voice. To help you bring this energy to your
virtual training you can remind yourself of the bigger role you
play and the higher purpose behind developing others to help
your organization accomplish its vision and mission. You also
are hopefully excited about the training topic naturally. This
way your learners will be as well. If you aren’t, try to dig deep
and find at least one thing about the training topic that you are
genuinely excited about. Start there and your enthusiasm may
grow. Obviously, if your training topic is how to manage
unacceptable employee performance, that is not a go-getter

topic for anyone involved. However, you can dig deep to
discover the motivation for you in the topic to help your
organization succeed and bring that natural energy to your
training. It must be real.
The virtual training takeaway for us is that we must strive to
lead the creation of healthy, supportive, positive climates that
nurture learning as we discussed in chapter 3. We do this
through effective vocal delivery and positive energy. We show
up as our best selves and with our whole person to help
learners be successful.
Vocal Care for Virtual Facilitators
Because we rely so heavily on our voices in virtual training,
we are essentially vocal athletes. Our vocal cords are muscles
like other muscles in our body, so they, too, benefit from a
warm-up before extensive use. Otherwise in extreme situations
when you’re talking at length for several days and this is
outside your normal routine, you risk straining your voice,
temporarily losing your voice, or going hoarse. Staying
hydrated is particularly important beforehand. Contrary to
popular belief, you actually need to drink water several hours
before training to hydrate your vocal cords. Ice-cold water can
usually shock vocal cords, so drinking room-temperature
water during online classes is better. I also find that warm,
herbal tea can soothe my vocal cords and remove mouth
noises like clicking when I speak. Caffeine can also dry out
the larynx, so be judicious with caffeinated beverages before a
session. Ideally, we want to keep our voice box hydrated and
relaxed to produce the best sound.
Some days you may have several virtual training classes and
will be using your voice more than usual. On these days, you
will want to vocally warm up beforehand. This is especially
helpful if you facilitate first thing in the morning in your time
zone. Let’s look at some vocal warm-ups you can try:
Humming.
• Simply humming is a great way to ease your vocal cords
back into use in the early morning, and is one of the best

ways to warm up your voice. You can hum a scale or a
tone or a few notes.
Sirens.
• Begin at the very top of your vocal range projecting a
resonant sound and then let you voice drop to your lowest
register. It should sound just like an ambulance siren
going by. Then reverse the direction and do the same
thing—going from the bottom of your range to the top of
your range. After a few times, you will hear how it opens
your voice for your entire register.
“Aluminum, linoleum, aluminum, linoleum.”
• This is a standard vocal warmup. If you say these words
repeatedly and over-enunciate them, it helps you warm up
your ability to shape sounds with your mouth and more
clearly enunciate consonants so learners can understand
everything you say.
Audio Equipment
Before facilitating, always test your equipment before class
day. For example, the unique circuitry of different devices can
result in a high-quality microphone working well with one
device, but not with another. Every computer can react
differently to a microphone pairing, so always check your
equipment ahead of time and have someone else join you on a
tech check to let you know how it sounds and if there are any
issues. Work with your producer, colleague, or trusted
confidante to thoroughly test audio quality before your live
event. This will also reduce your stress level. If you are testing
it yourself, record part of your speaking portion and listen to
the playback to assess quality.
With live online delivery, everything a facilitator says in
real time must be communicated through a microphone. If
using an external microphone, ensure it is set to the cardioid
setting, which looks like an upside-down heart. It’s also
helpful to train in a carpeted room filled with furniture,
curtains, and other material that can help absorb sound, so
your audio doesn’t bounce and reverberate. And be wary of

buzzing sounds from monitors or overhead lights. When using
an external mic, you may need to use other lighting, switch
computers, or change rooms.
Noise-cancelling headsets and other devices as mentioned
earlier in this chapter can be a great remedy for ambient,
environmental noise. Noise-cancelling headsets work best with
lower sound frequencies. You can significantly improve your
audio quality by using a USB external microphone, headset,
earbuds, or air pods. Thankfully, transmitting background
noise through your microphone is less likely with headsets. As
a best practice, avoid using your device’s built-in microphone
because it can make your voice sound like it is bouncing off
the walls in a cave or large room.
To optimize audio quality, where you place an external
microphone and headset mic also makes a difference. If you
place it too close to your mouth, you can sound too breathy
and it might pick up breathing and other clicking mouth
sounds. If it is too far away, learners may find it difficult to
hear you. For an external microphone, elevate it so it is
approximately at chin level but still out of camera view. Do
not position your mouth within inches of the microphone or
directly aligned with it. If you do, it will create distracting
pops of air (plosives) and learners will be able to hear your
breathing. This can be distracting and make it more
challenging for learners to clearly hear what you’re saying.
Position the microphone slightly to the side of your mouth to
avoid these popping sounds. For headsets, place the mic above
your mouth to avoid plosives or farther below your mouth,
aligned with your chin. These are the sweet spots where you
will not be too close to pick up unwanted breathing sounds,
yet at the same time you’re not too far away to magnify sound.
In terms of vocal volume, adopt the mindset of projecting
your voice to fill the space and not unintentionally shrinking
your voice because you have a microphone. Remind learners
to let you know if they cannot hear you. They usually let you
know in chat or your producer will let you know if your audio
drops mid-session. It is always best practice to set levels and
check audio with your producer at least 30 minutes before the
live session begins, even if you met for a tech-check on a

different day. This buffer also provides an extra window of
time in case you need to troubleshoot anything else
technically.
Summary
Vocal delivery is just one way to enhance facilitator presence
with learners. There is always room for professional growth.
We have established that the voice plays a significant role in
communicating intention, care, attention, energy, enthusiasm,
professionalism, pace, rapport, how much learners pay
attention, and more. We’ve also established that how you say
something is just as important as what you say, if not more
important.
Elevating your energy, varying your inflection, minimizing
vocalized pauses, using proper breath support, and speaking
with a conversational style all help to build your capability in
facilitator presence. In addition to developing your online
presence as a facilitator, it’s also important to develop your
technical fluency. In the next chapter, we’ll look at how you
can best leverage your platform’s technical tools for virtual
training.
As a professional virtual facilitator, continue to enhance
your online presence by elevating the quality of your audio
and vocal delivery. Keep polishing your facilitator presence
skills to take your virtual training to the next level.
In the next chapter, we’ll explore the many tools available
to you in virtual training platforms.
Pro Tips for Improving Facilitator
Presence through Vocal Delivery
TIP
39
If your virtual training platform does not have the ability to
silence ambient noise, use noise-cancelling headsets or an
external mic in a quiet space.
TIP
With upright posture, breathe from your diaphragm when you

40
facilitate online.
TIP
41
Work to eventually replace vocalized pauses with a real
pause.
TIP
42
Pause briefly between sentences to create space for learners
to process what you just said.
TIP
43
To slow speaking rate, speak in phrases—not sentences.
TIP
44
Vary your rate of vocal delivery for emphasis and as an
attention-getting technique.
TIP
45
Speak with a conversational style using informal language.
TIP
46
Intentionally use personal pronouns to promote deeper
learning.
TIP
47
To create more interest, vary your vocal inflection.

“vILT tools offer features that enable instructors to optimize
the learning experience, helping learners retain information
and collaborate, potentially increasing employee engagement,
and driving revenue.”
—Josh Bersin, global industry analyst, thought leader, and
author

Leveraging Your Platform’s
Technical Tools
When I worked for a large US corporation, one of the leaders
often updated the entire division through synchronous web
conferencing. Although most staff were on-site at desks,
others were remote or in field offices. Unfortunately, even
though the platform offered many interactive features, these
sessions did not take advantage of them. The communication
was one-way, absent of any interaction. Attendees only heard
this leader’s live audio and viewed slide after slide for what
seemed like a millennium. Sound familiar? I’m sure you may
have had a similar experience at one time or another. As you
can imagine, there were literally paper airplanes flying over
cubicle walls during those virtual sessions.
With virtual training, online facilitators must play an active
role to continually refocus learner attention. As we established
earlier in this book, thoughtful experience design, cultivating a
welcoming and psychologically safe environment, elevating
your virtual facilitation skills, building your on-camera
competence, and optimizing vocal delivery are all ways to
direct focus and support learning. In this chapter, let’s turn our
attention to how to use virtual platform tools to capture
attention and engage learners.
What is remarkable about video conferencing and virtual
training platforms is their ability to integrate multiple media
formats seamlessly. This is evident through the integration of
video, 
internet 
content, 
application 
sharing, 
audio,
collaborative whiteboard tools, live polls, and chat. By
discussing these tools, we introduce the next capability,
technical fluency. Technical fluency means upskilling your

proficiency in all things digital related to virtual training. This
means modern virtual trainers and professional online
facilitators must be well-versed in a variety of rapidly
changing platforms, virtual tools, on-screen interactions, and
updated hardware and software. Naturally, during the COVID-
19 pandemic, features and functionality improved rapidly as
high customer demand exploded globally. These marketable
product improvements will likely continue into the foreseeable
future.
Although some facilitators use a variety of virtual tools in
their online training, others may not. And other practitioners
are not always confident about how best to use them and why.
There is a current skill and knowledge gap in this area. In a
fall 2020 survey, 83 percent of higher education IT leaders
reported that their top priority was to improve usage of
instructional tools for synchronous learning (Pelletier et al.
2021). As mentioned earlier, still others may have a variety of
features on their virtual training platform but do not regularly
use them in virtual training. According to ATD’s 2021
research report on leveraging virtual training technology, some
tools like chat, screen sharing, and hand-raising prompts were
commonly used. For example, out of the 430-plus talent
development respondents, 93 percent reported regularly using
chat, 90 percent used screen sharing, and 82 percent used
hand-raising prompts. However, less-used tools included
reaction feedback from participants, annotation tools, and
virtual whiteboards. Only 49 percent reported regularly using
reaction feedback indicators, 52 percent regularly used
annotation tools, and 59 percent reported regular use of digital
whiteboards (ATD 2021).
By developing your technical fluency capability, not only
can you more confidently start using more tools but you’ll also
improve your knowledge about when and how to use them.
Doing so makes you more likely to be part of a high-
performing organization. “Failing to leverage every tool
offered by a virtual classroom platform represents a lost
opportunity for talent development. On average, high-
performing organizations use a significantly higher percentage
of the available features than other organizations” (ATD

2021). Let’s explore the variety of technical tools available to
you in virtual training to elevate your fluency.
THE BIG IDEA
Strategically leverage virtual platform tools at the
right time with the right activity for the right
reason.
Leveraging Virtual Tools
We are fortunate to have all the affordances of today’s
technologies to aid online learning. Because we can observe
patterns from the past, we know that live online technology
will continue to improve in quality and in ease of use.
However, just because something is available doesn’t mean we
should use it. And when we do use it, we need to be mindful
of guidelines for using it well. For example, in chapter 5 when
we explored on-camera competence, we learned that there’s
more to using video judiciously than just turning on a camera.
I remember when having the option to choose more than
one font first emerged in word processing. My colleagues
began typing documents that used many different fonts all on
one page. Why? Because they could. I remember reading a
colleague’s work, where she proudly showed me how each
paragraph had key words in a different font. Multiple fonts
were new technology at the time, and she was naturally
excited to try them out. Professionals have since discovered
that using an excessive number of fonts distracts readers more
than it helps them. Just because we have dozens of fonts
available, doesn’t mean we should try to use them all,
especially in the same document.
The same is true for technical tools. Just because a virtual
training platform has live polls, does not mean we should poll
our learners every five minutes. At some point, learners would
habituate to them. Polls would become old hat, and their
overuse would weaken their power to captivate attention, as
discussed in chapter 4. Likewise, just because you have so
many tools at your disposal doesn’t mean we overload learners
by jumping from using one tool to another without explaining

connections, key points, and transitions. We want to use them,
yes. Tools help us explain, illustrate, discuss, process, reflect,
or practice. So, how should we effectively leverage the tools
available to us in virtual platforms? The answer begins by
referencing those initial learning objectives and allowing your
performance and knowledge objectives discussed in chapter 2
to drive the selection of learning activities.
PRO TIP 48
Once learners successfully use a virtual tool, the
more likely they are to use it again.
For our purposes, we will assume that live video and audio
platform features are a given. Facilitator video and audio have
also been addressed extensively in previous chapters.
Although music is not addressed specifically below, some
platforms do allow for music to be played and broadcast to all
participants. When I was a virtual trainer for SkillPath, our
producers would broadcast upbeat music through Adobe
Connect during breaks. This was a great way to infuse energy
into the session, and there is plenty of non-proprietary and
royalty-free music available for you to use.
So, let’s look at some of the most common virtual training
tools. Most platforms offer many of these tools, although they
may vary slightly by interface or location on the platform. I
have organized them into the following categories to provide a
more 
manageable 
approach: 
basic, 
intermediate, 
and
advanced:
• Basic tools
 Chat
 Virtual hand raising
 Reaction feedback
 Screen sharing
 Document upload
 Randomizer
• Intermediate tools
 Annotation tools

 Live polling
 Video clip playback
 Countdown timer
• Advanced tools
 Virtual whiteboards
 Breakouts
Basic Virtual Tools
In this category, we discuss the tools that are easier to use, and
perhaps because of this, more commonly used. They are also
more intuitive and self-evident. Although I once had a virtual
learner who I noticed was not participating in chat. After the
session, he connected with me and helped me understand that
he wasn’t clear on which button to click to send his chat posts.
This taught me once again to be careful about making
assumptions about what learners do and don’t know how to
do. The tools we’ll address in the basic category are chat,
virtual hand raising, reaction feedback, screen sharing,
document upload, and randomizer. Let’s begin with chat.
Chat
Chat allows for text communication in real time by all parties.
Over the years, it’s been referred to as the chat panel, chat
pane, chat pod, chat queue, and now, just chat. This tool is a
great way for facilitators and learners alike to send instant text
communications either publicly to all attending or privately to
select individuals. In the chat log in Figure 7-1, you can see
learners greeting each other and reflecting on the pre-test they
took before attending this virtual training session on emotional
intelligence. Notice the conversational feel and the flow back
and forth between chat responses. Also observe their honest
reflection as they discuss how to manage their emotions in
response to the facilitator’s question prompts.
What you might be surprised to learn is that chat is an oral
medium. It may seem like written communication because you
are typing. But the immediacy of the back-and-forth

responses, the casual tone, and the conversational style
demonstrates all the elements of orality. One of the
affordances of chat’s real-time interaction is that virtual
facilitators can observe the stream of consciousness from their
learners. This provides a window into how learners are
thinking about the conversation at any moment, which is
something you were not privy to as a traditional in-person
trainer. Additionally, chat gives voice to all learners at any
time, as long as chat is enabled. For example, if your pet
suddenly appears in the video frame behind you, several
learners will likely ask its name or breed or comment on how
cute it is. Then, you will likely see other learners’ comments
about having the same type of dog breed or that they used to
own a pet like that. Side conversations such as these can help
form connections, and help learners move along the different
stages in the 5 Cs Pyramid from chapter 3.
Chat can also be leveraged for intermittent check-ins. This
gives you a quick pulse on where learners are coming from.
As you see their responses to your question prompts, invite
them to share their ideas or work with them closely on
problem solving a challenge together. Chat incorporates the
social, cognitive, and emotional dimensions of learning. If
users are excited about something or highly motivated, you see
this emotion through their punctuation with exclamation
marks, all capital letters, or smiley faces.
Figure 7-1. Chat Example

The cognitive dimension—the bedrock of the learning
dimensions—is at play here as learners think about their
responses and use mental resources. We used to have to show
learners how to use chat during the platform tour at the
beginning of training. We also used to have to tell them to type

in what city, state, or country they’re connecting from, and
they always would when prompted. But after the global
acceleration of virtual tool use during the COVID-19
pandemic, most learners will now automatically chat about
where they are connecting from without being prompted.
Chat is also a way to discover more about the learners.
Watch their comments for hints about where they’re
struggling, where the content is resonating, or where they
might be slightly off and need a bit of course correction.
Sometimes, learners will pose a question they’re puzzling over
in chat, and one of their peers will respond and answer their
question, so it’s a great way to crowd source.
This is not something we could do in an in-person
classroom, unless learners connected with their own devices to
contribute to a word cloud or provide responses that were then
projected on a screen in the room. In a traditional classroom,
when a facilitator speaks, they are not immediately privy to the
inner thoughts and reactions of learners. So, this is a clear
benefit the virtual space provides that traditional in-person
training or classrooms do not.
When to Avoid Chat
Chat has an undercurrent of immediacy. For this reason, it is
not conducive for lengthy responses. For example, if you say,
“Tell me about a time when you experienced your greatest
creativity in your professional career.” This is something that
could be hinted at in chat but is better shared in richer
storytelling format via discussion in the large group or in
breakouts.
Let’s explore this further. Stop and think about how a
learner uses chat. There is pressure to respond immediately
because of the oral nature of the medium. There is also a
natural lag. After the facilitator asks a question, the users must
think about it and then type before the response is visible. In
this rush, there is no time for deep thinking. In fact, you’ll
often see spelling errors in chat, which testifies to the
immediacy of typing fast and the rush to post quickly without
proofing. For richer discussion when you can go much deeper

and explore the nuances of something, live oral conversation is
best. Some learners will inevitably feel more comfortable
contributing in the less anxiety-ridden medium of chat,
however, so always keep that option open for them as well.
Best Practices for Using Chat
Chat is good for crisp, short answers. For example, imagine
we’re training on the topic of leadership, and as facilitator, I
say, “Think of some of the most effective leaders you’ve met
or observed. What is it that they do well that makes them a
good leader?” This question tees up participants to share brief
responses very appropriate to the fast medium. The following
phrases might start appearing in chat: “sets clear vision,”
“actively 
listens,” 
“influences 
others,” 
“builds 
good
relationships.” All of these are phrased responses that are
perfect for chat because they are just a few words—easily
typable for the sender and easily scannable for the reader.
You can also use chat for participant responses to a starter
activity. Jane Bozarth (2016) recommends displaying a slide
where you show learners the beginning of a sentence that
participants then complete. For example, “The best negotiation
tip I know is …” Additionally, you can conduct round-robins
via chat where learners take turns adding their ideas to a
common goal, improving a process, or expanding on an idea
by following the order in the participant panel (Bozarth
2016a).
Here are some additional best practices for chat:
• Use chat when seeking succinct responses to open-ended
questions. For example, if you are training on assertive
communication skills, you might ask participants to let
you know in chat “What are some examples of aggressive
communication phrases?” They might type, “I don’t care
how you get it done. Just get it done.” Finally, you can ask
them to let you know in chat some examples of assertive
communication. For example, “I need to report on this
tomorrow. Would you be able to complete it by mid-
afternoon today?”

• Encourage and affirm responses when you see them,
especially in the beginning. It feels great to be recognized
and have your question heard and addressed aloud. This
can encourage engagement because you make it
rewarding to do so again. If you have a co-facilitator or
producer and they are experts in the subject matter, they
can address some questions through chat if you’ve missed
them or don’t have time to address them.
• Call out names when referencing their chat. Reference it
by calling out an attendee’s first name; for example,
“Casey is sharing …” or “Wenche adds that …” or
“Ursula says …” This recognizes participants, while
encouraging more of this behavior because you have
rewarded them.
• Read some comments aloud, or paraphrase if you’re sure
you interpreted the meaning correctly. It’s important to
read a few comments out loud because this communicates
that “I see you and I hear you.” Inexperienced facilitators
may just answer the question aloud without the context or
crediting where that question came from. However, saying
“Ali is asking about tips for coaching staff. Let’s throw
that out to the group. What are your thoughts about
effective coaching tips?” is an opportunity to weave Ali
and their question into the session, and organically gives
them more ownership in it.
• Quickly scan and strategically select which comments to
read aloud. Avoid randomly reading aloud the first three
responses you see. Be strategic: Which ones tie into the
main points you want learners to walk away with? Which
ones trigger new but important questions? Which ones hit
the bull’s eye? Which ones are an opportunity for
corrective feedback? You want to call these out to
reinforce key points.
• Do not read all chat responses. It gets old if you read every
single comment. To keep things interactive, highlight a
few. Participants can scroll and read the rest of the
comments if they wish.

• Use paired chat. For some activities, you can use private
chat for participants, which pairs them with a partner in
class. This works best if the facilitator arranges and
communicates these pairings. This way, the
conversational chat can only be seen by the two
individuals as they discuss and brainstorm and problem
solve depending on the communicated task.
PRO TIP 49
Leverage chat for immediate responses to
prompts that a learner can answer in a brief
phrase or with a few words.
Virtual Hand Raising
The icons shown in Figure 7-2 are traditionally found in
participant panels where you can see if a virtual learner has
raised their hand. Learners might raise a virtual hand to ask a
question or make a comment. We understand the symbolic
meaning from our own schooling, because we were
conditioned to raise our hands in formal settings before asking
a question. You can use these icons when learners have
questions, a comment, want to share without speaking over
others, respond to yes or no questions, have finished an
exercise and are letting you know, or return from a break.
Figure 7-2. Adobe Connect Example of Hand-Raising
Virtual hand raising uses the cognitive dimension of
learning because there is usually a comment, question, idea,

challenge, or objection behind the hand raise. Using this tool
also relies heavily on the social dimension because the
facilitator and learners are reacting with each other in the
group context and learning from one another.
For more orderly verbal discussion, it can work very well
for participants to raise their virtual hands when they have
professional experiences to share, such as stories or insights
for comment. However, when you aim to establish a flow with
back-and-forth-discussion, it can work better to invite all to
come on camera and come off mute, stop sharing any other
applications, and keep the verbal discussion flowing by just
looking at faces on live video. This way you avoid the stop-
start pattern of raising hands, waiting to be called on, and
finally, unmuting to share.
PRO TIP 50
Request learners use the raise virtual hand
feature for quick responses or when they have a
comment or question.
Reaction Feedback
Virtual training platforms have always had some options for
participant reaction feedback. These are the wide variety of
icons that allow participants to quickly communicate to
facilitators or other participants how they are doing and
feeling. In the early days of virtual training or web
conferencing, we called participant reaction buttons status
indicators. As this name implies, these button options (which
now include emoticons) help communicate a participant’s
status. For example, if a learner steps away to get a cup of
coffee, they might click the coffee icon. If they agree with a
question, they can click the green check. If they disagree, they
can click the red x. If they applaud a peer’s practice role play
on a training topic, they may click the thumbs up icon.
The best time to use reaction feedback is for closed-end
questions. For example, in a leadership class, if you asked,
“Are you new to supervisory leadership within the last year? If
yes, click the green check, and if no, click the red x.” This is a
great way to collect quick responses and you avoid the string

of yes and no in your chat. One of my colleagues shares
scenarios with learners and stops at critical decision points. He
asks learners to vote on what they might do next. A green
check means they approve of the character’s choice and a red
x means they would intervene. In the participant panel, he can
then quickly scan this simultaneous feedback to get a pulse on
the group’s responses.
Animated gestures are another type of reaction feedback
(Figure 7-3). Gestures have always been an integral element of
human communication. They help convey and clarify the
meaning of our intended messages. They enhance what we say
and how we say it. Animated gestures bring in the emotional
dimension of learning because of the joyous nature of
applause, celebration, and thumbs up or other emoticons that
might reflect a learner’s state emotionally. Usually, when one
learner shares a thumb’s up or an applause animated icon,
others will follow. As a result, this can also bring in the group
dynamic and social dimension.
Figure 7-3. Cisco Webex Example of Animated
Gestures
In Cisco’s Webex platform, for example, there is hand
gesture recognition, which translates user hand movements in
their video frame to a matching icon. This enhanced
communication technology is also customizable to respect
different interpretations of gestures within regional cultures.

For example, if you give a thumb’s up in real life with your
webcam on, Webex’s artificial intelligence (AI) will convert
your own gesture into an animated image of a thumbs up
onscreen. Or if you clap, an applause icon will appear.
Unmuting or using the mouse or keyboard is not required for
this functionality to work. These also provide fun, additional
ways to share nonverbal and text-based feedback.
The addition of emoticons and animated gestures have only
expanded the palette for participants. The older Microsoft
Office Live Meeting platform included a visual seating chart
grid where learners had options like “proceed” (which was
green) and the ability to change their color and their status.
This tool could provide instant and simultaneous feedback
from multiple learners to the facilitator. Other feedback
buttons or icons include emoticons, applause, went to get
coffee, or away. For example, I often ask participants to select
the green check once they’re back from the break and ready to
go. Alternatively, I ask them to use the green check when they
are done working on a quick individual exercise because I
cannot see them lay down their pen or stop typing; this is the
signal they give me when they’ve completed the assignment.
With today’s modern platforms, we now have animated
options as well. For example, some icons that are
distinguishable as shapes are preferred over colored dots
because colorblind individuals may not be able to tell the
difference between the colored dots. They would, however, be
able to discern a check or an x.
PRO TIP 51
Encourage learners to use reaction feedback to
communicate in real time in a fun way.
Screen Sharing
When application sharing first emerged in this field, we used
to only be allowed to share our entire desktop. Back then, it
was important to close everything else on your desktop before
activating this share feature. With current tools, we can select
exactly which document or application to share, while also

being able to select desktop or monitor 1 or 2, if needed
(Figure 7-4).
Figure 7-4. Zoom Example of Screen Sharing
To effectively screen share, ensure you:
• Close all other applications on your desktop that are not
relevant to the session. Even if there’s less risk people will
see something you don’t want them to see, applications
you don’t need to have running will eat up your
bandwidth as you are sharing your screen with other
participants.
• Select to share system audio when appropriate. In MS
Teams, for example, you need to select that you will be
sharing system audio if you are going to play a video
through the app. Make sure you select this before sharing
to ensure in-app audio (besides your speaking voice)
works correctly.
• Give verbal cues when you are transitioning between
screen shares. Let learners know what you’re doing,
because they have no visual cues to see what you’re doing
or what’s coming up next, as discussed in chapter 4.
Here are some examples of when you might use this tool:
• Sharing slides via screen share where you can alt/tab to
find your other open windows and then resize them
accordingly so that you can share two open apps on one
screen.

• A game show-like review game on slides for review of
content knowledge.
• Share an application for a live software demo.
• Share slide visuals for a case scenario challenge with still
shots setting up the scenario and its choices.
• Share a desktop application document or digital workbook
that attendees were provided ahead of the session.
PRO TIP 52
Leverage screen sharing to share clarifying
visuals, provide examples, or illustrate the
instructional content.
Document Upload
Document uploads are a way to pre-load documents, slides, or
PDFs. The convenience of an upload is that the document
remains in your platform and is ready for you well before class
day. It’s always a good idea to go through your documents or
slides after uploading them to ensure that nothing has changed
in the upload process in terms of visibility, font size,
animations, or anything else. In some platforms, your
animations may “flatten” so only the final state of the slide is
displayed; if you want to include gradual builds, you can
alternate in-app slide visuals with screen sharing a
presentation app such as PowerPoint.
Overall, document upload is a great way to place multiple
documents that you’ll need for your virtual training class into
the platform. It allows for you to have them all in one place,
and ready to go on the virtual training day. Additionally, you
can sometimes store additional prepared elements near your
document uploads.
In the example in Figure 7-5, in addition to uploading slides
into the platform, the facilitator also placed multiple
whiteboards that were prepared ahead of time so they are
ready to be used throughout the training. This provides an easy
and convenient way for facilitators to switch from a
whiteboard to slides to a different whiteboard.

Figure 7-5. Cisco WebEx Training Center Example of
Slide Upload
PRO TIP 53
For large group discussions, close slide sharing
and invite all participants to come on camera.
Randomizer
The Randomizer extension in Adobe Connect allows for the
facilitator to randomly select an attendee during the session
and display the selected name for all who are online to see
(Figure 7-6). Always give learners a heads up when you will
be using the randomizer. Adult learners, especially introverts,
may feel uncomfortable being put on the spot. I always give
learners the option to pass if they are selected and I give them
lots of time up front to prepare their answers if called upon. In
all my years of virtual training, I’ve only had one adult learner
request to pass. Randomizers are also great for selecting a
name for prizes at the end of the session.
Figure 7-6. Adobe Connect Example of Randomizer

Intermediate Virtual Tools
In addition to the basic virtual training platform tools, there are
other tools that may take some practice and a bit more nuance.
As you grow in technical fluency capability, you will also
become faster, more creative, and confident using these tools.
So, in the intermediate category, we will explore annotation
tools, live polling, video clip playback, and using a countdown
timer.
Annotation Tools
Annotation tools are the drawing tools, which facilitators and
learners can both use on virtual platforms. They allow both
parties viewing and editing to access a shared screen where
they can create and erase illustrations. In many platforms,
these drawing tools can be found in an annotation toolbar or in
a drop-down menu (Figure 7-7). They are a great way to not
only direct learner focus, but also clarify which part of the
visual you’re explaining at the time you discuss it. This way,
the learner does not have to waste precious working memory
resources searching for the part of the image you’re
explaining. By the time they find where you are, you may be
done talking about that part.
Figure 7-7. GoToTraining Example of Annotation Tools

Sometimes, however, annotations can disrupt virtual
sessions if they’re not managed well. For example, learners
may start drawing on shared visuals at inappropriate times if
the tools are enabled and the annotation toolbar is accessible.
Younger family members of participants have even been
known to draw with them, although not realizing everyone
else could also see them. In these situations, you would need
to verbally address this issue right away, as well as clear the
drawings quickly. In Zoom, for example, you have a more
advanced option to specifically clear viewers’ drawings, clear
your drawings, or clear all drawings. If your design does not
plan for whiteboarding or annotation—although I recommend
you leverage both—you may keep it disabled for participants.
But make sure annotation is always enabled for facilitator use.
It’s best to enable annotation for learners, of course, to be
more interactive. Whiteboarding, which we’ll discuss later in
the advanced tools section, especially relies on learners using
the annotation toolbar.
In some platforms, annotations also need to be cleared
before advancing to the next slide. Still other platforms allow
annotations to remain on a slide, but then do not carry over to
the next. You need to understand which way your training
platform operates before starting your virtual session. If you
are not aware that annotations carry over to other slides during
your session—or how to erase them either individually or

clearing them all at once—this can cause disruption. In chapter
9, we talk specifically about preventive actions you can take to
ensure this doesn’t happen to you. I always advise clients to
play with and practice using annotation tools with a remote
colleague. This way you can ensure you know how they work
in a live training session.
An easier way to avoid the potential disruption of uncleared
annotations in Zoom, for example, is to use the vanishing pen.
As an advanced annotation tool, Zoom’s vanishing pen allows
you to circle—with the color of your choice—a visual or
object on the screen. The drawing or highlight—if you’re
calling attention to something—will display for approximately
three seconds before it automatically disappears. The elegance
of this annotation feature is you don’t have to worry about
clearing your annotation, but learners still experience the
benefit of you highlighting what is visually important or using
it as a form of emphasis. Along with the vanishing pen in
Zoom, you may also use a variety of stamps with stars, arrows,
checkmarks, and question marks, as well as ready-made
customizable shapes and freehand drawing. You can also save
the screenshot or annotated image as a PNG on your device, if
needed.
For prescriptive tips, adhere to the following best practices:
• Well before your class day, rehearse with the tools exactly
how you will use them. This includes turning them on,
setting colors, drawing width, circling, highlighting, and
using arrows, the laser pointer, or any other elements.
• Test with your producer acting as the attendee to ensure
your annotations are enabled before you request attendees
annotate. Permissions, rights, and correct role assignments
as organizer, host, or presenter, as well as enabling or
disabling functionality mean everything in virtual training
platforms. Sometimes, a single little permission can make
the difference between successfully using the platform the
way you need it to work and struggling to find something
that has not yet been enabled.
• Use annotation tools but use them sparingly to draw the
learner’s eye and focus attention. The annotation

movement draws focus, as we discuss in chapter 8. Use it
strategically to highlight the most important points and
where learners should be looking during your
explanations.
• Always pre-determine how to clear all annotations on a
slide. Some platforms carry over annotations to the next
slide. Others leave them on the slide where you entered
them but do not carry them over. You need to know ahead
of time. The most important thing to remember about the
drawing tools is how to turn them off, and how to get your
cursor back once you’ve turned them on.
Consider the following example from one of my clients who
was training medical staff in a healthcare context. She shared
her screen with imaging on a slide, and as facilitator, used
annotation tools to type the anatomy on her slide visual as text
labels (for example, compacted and noncompacted). She then
asked learners to identify the proper place in the imaging
where the walls began to uncompact. This was an opportunity
for learners to also use annotation tools. Learners used their
drawing tools to add the white x’s you see on Figure 7-8.
Learners also were asked to draw lines of noncompacted
myocardium and another line to identify compacted
myocardium. The facilitator then used live annotation to add
arrows pointed to any errors. This active use of annotation by
both facilitator and learners was a great way to clarify, check
knowledge, provide immediate corrective feedback, and
ultimately help virtual learners determine whether they could
diagnose left ventricular noncompaction.
Figure 7-8. Example of Annotation

PRO TIP 54
Use live annotation such as highlighting, circling,
arrows, or the laser pointer to direct learners’
focus to key elements of a supporting visual.
Live Polling
Live polls are prepared questions posed to all participants for
immediate voting (Figure 7-9). You can also use them to share
results with all participants in real time. Polls are a great way
to collect information from your participants quickly. For
example, you can find out how much they know about a topic,
whether they’re using behavioral style assessments or
something else at their organization, and more. Polls also work
well when you want to ask closed-ended questions with yes/no
responses (Clark and Kwinn 2007). I like to use polls to
review content with learners to take a quick pulse on whether
or not they’re comprehending the material and if it’s
resonating with them and making sense. Not all platforms
have polling features, but many integrate other surveys or apps
as an alternative way to poll your learners.
Figure 7-9. Adobe Connect 11 Live Poll Example

Novice facilitators may use a poll for the sake of using a
poll or just trying to insert a question for the sake of adding
interactivity. However, the most effective use of polling is to
collect data on your audience’s opinions, experience, attitudes,
knowledge, or behavior. Intermediate facilitators then either
remember or jot down the top two most popular answers so
they don’t forget them, and then refer to the data as they move
forward with their virtual training class. You can also use polls
as a pre-test or post-test to measure baseline knowledge with
your participants on the front-end and then compare this to
what they’ve learned or demonstrate that they know at the end.
The poll questions themselves should be tightly interwoven
and relevant to the subject matter. For example, if you are
training a virtual class on how to facilitate online training, one
of your opening polls might ask which virtual training
platform they use. Multiple choice answers might include
GoToTraining, Webex, Adobe Connect, Microsoft Teams, and
Zoom. Dependent on how participants respond, you would
continue to build that information into the rest of your training.
For example, when you discuss virtual tools, you might say,
“Since most of you let me know in our poll that you primarily
use Adobe Connect, make sure you know how to …” This is
one way to reference back to the information you collected
from the polls.
Because participants take the time to vote their opinion,
always broadcast the results of the poll so they can see their
responses. If for some reason, you experience technical

difficulties and are not able to visually share the results,
summarize them verbally so participants receive closure for
their investment in the activity. There are certainly occasions
when the poll feature may not load correctly and therefore not
work appropriately. In these instances, be ready with your
backup plan. I always try to have a printout of all my
whiteboard questions and poll questions and answers just in
case the technology has glitches. This way, you can pose the
questions verbally and ask them to vote A, B, C, or D in the
chat. Alternatively, you can have a pre-prepared slide with poll
questions that you can use instead as your Plan B, which we’ll
talk more about in chapter 9.
And as always, make sure to practice using the poll
beforehand. Practice opening a poll, sharing a poll, closing a
poll, sharing results of the poll, and moving on to your next
segment. To ensure all goes smoothly, you need to know the
process.
Video Clip Playback
Many virtual training platforms have built-in video players
where you can share videos and watch them together live
during virtual class. Using the built-in video player will offer
more qualitative viewing than if the video was shown as part
of screen sharing. For example, in Zoom, facilitators may click
share screen, then switch to the advanced tab and select video.
From there, they can select the video they wish to view and
click open. This way the video is not only opened within the
platform itself but also playable from there for all participants
to view (Figure 7-10).
Because playing videos online often seems fraught with
technical challenges (there’s almost always someone who
cannot see or hear them or the video freezes due to bandwidth
issues), I often assign videos to be viewed beforehand through
pre-work assignments. This way it stirs their curiosity on the
topic, and they have more time to think about it before coming
to class.
You can also place links to a video in the chat, invite
learners to view the three-minute video on their own right

now, and then prompt them to come back to the session in five
minutes, so the group at large can discuss it. Regardless of
whether you show it live, they view the video beforehand, or
they mute their mic to view on their own and then rejoin the
session, you always want to prepare their viewing. In other
words, let them know what they should be watching for. For
example, “As you watch this video, notice what the manager
does to demonstrate they are actively listening, and see if you
can identify the impact on the employee.” This is a way to
prime the learner for what to pay attention to, and it can also
help them focus on key aspects that you’ll bring into the
discussion debriefing after viewing.
Figure 7-10. Zoom Example of Annotating a Video Clip
Countdown Timer
Countdown timers display a visible clock for all participants to
see (Figure 7-11). Timers can usually be set for any amount of
time and count down from there. They are available on some,
but not all virtual training platforms. Timers are useful for
setting time limits for certain activities, which frees the
facilitator from being timekeeper. For example, when learners
work independently on exercises in their participant guides or
digital workbooks, timers can communicate how much time to
devote to the exercise. Countdown timers can also be used
during breaks to clarify when it’s time to return, especially if

there are differences across time zones for participants.
Facilitators may also use timers to set time limits for reflection
exercises or allocate time for learners to start working on
action plans. I like to use them for brainstorming exercises
with a group at large, when appropriate to the content.
Figure 7-11. Adobe Connect Example of Countdown
Timer
Advanced Virtual Tools
Next, let’s look at the advanced virtual tools, which include
whiteboards and breakouts. I’ve placed these two in the
advanced category because they are inherently more complex.
They require more skill and knowledge on the part of the
facilitator to successfully manage. Please note that partnering
with your producer when using these virtual tools can also be
extremely helpful.
Virtual Whiteboards
Many participants and facilitators resort to drawing shapes and
words and pictures on whiteboards and seem to be unclear
how best to use them (Figure 7-12). Although this might be
fun socially, there are also ways to bring more purpose that
ties into the learning objectives and supports your training
concepts. Not knowing how to best use digital whiteboards is
common and widespread in secondary education, academia,

professional education, and online learning. Let’s explore
some tips now.
Figure 7-12. Adobe Connect 11 Example of Virtual
Whiteboard
If you facilitate a virtual training session for call center staff
on how to improve customer service, for example, you could
begin by displaying a quadrant on the whiteboard. In the top
left, you could title a space for characteristics of poor customer
service skills, and in the top right, characteristics of good
customer service skills. Frame the exercise so that participants
are thinking of themselves as the customer. Ask them to think
back on their own experiences shopping for retail items,
speaking to a phone service provider, or receiving service on a
vehicle. Ask them to type responses to identify pain points of
poor customer service they’ve experienced, as well as aspects
of good service to make it more tangible. Use this as a
stepping stone for a larger discussion about improving
customer service at the call center. Next, request they consider
and type in responses in the bottom quadrants related to
improvement opportunities and strengths with the call center’s
current level of service to customers.

Whiteboards can bring in the behavioral dimension of
learning because using them involves doing. If the overarching
learning objectives are knowledge based, the whiteboard can
serve as a conduit for checking knowledge, summarizing what
they currently know, or comparing concepts. Annotating on
the whiteboard also integrates the social dimension because of
the level of learner-to-learner interactions while participating.
Here are some considerations for virtual whiteboards:
• Prepare whiteboards ahead of time if your platform allows.
Not all virtual platforms allow you to prepare whiteboards
ahead of time or to prepare multiple ones. However, it can
be very tricky to do this on the fly. Some platforms only
allow you to create the whiteboard right before your
session begins. If this is the case for you, think through
and draw out what you want your whiteboard to say
before the class begins using it. You can either have your
producer create it by sharing your design with them ahead
of time, or you can plan it so that you start with it right
after a break so you can use your break to set it up and
have it ready to go.
• If your platform allows, tell learners not to worry about
their typed text overlapping and that you will spread it out
for better visibility. Although this is not a feature on all
virtual training platforms, it is very helpful to avoid visual
clutter. You can select the text they typed and then slide it
over to an open space, so all contributions can be easily
viewed and read.
• Design your learning activity so learners have something
meaningful to annotate on the whiteboard. I like to draw
columns down the middle and have participants compare
concepts. Additionally, I have them type one takeaway at
the end that they will apply right away.
• Practice and familiarize yourself with the idiosyncrasies of
whiteboards. Sometimes there are limitations for features
and platforms. “Some have quirks—like limiting the
number of users who can write on a board at a time—so
that’s something important to know” (Bozarth 2016b).

• When appropriate, keep contributions on the whiteboard
anonymous to increase participation. On some
whiteboards, learners are identified with a name inside an
arrow where they type or draw. However, if you hide their
names and keep their contributions anonymous, you may
see greater participation from the class, depending on how
well a group knows each other. In this case, it’s also
important to stress that their activity and participation is
anonymous. Sometimes this can be key to participants
feeling safe to share, especially if their supervisor or
manager is also attending. External whiteboarding tools
like Mural, Miro, and Padlet can also add to your
whiteboarding palette of options. Many of these tools
offer integrations and built-in templates for added
sophistication where appropriate.
PRO TIP 55
Leverage whiteboards for synchronous
brainstorming and for activities that involve
contribution by multiple participants concurrently.
One of my favorite activities for virtual whiteboards is to
have participants record their progress and ideas while
working in small groups. In Figure 7-13, the virtual training
platform was Adobe Connect. Learners were divided into
breakouts to identify and discuss what they had used as
successful strategies to work more effectively with challenging
or difficult co-workers. Each breakout had their own
whiteboard to collect responses and anchor discussion. Once
everyone returned to the main session, those whiteboards
could also be shared to facilitate a debrief with the whole
group.
Figure 7-13. Adobe Connect Example of Breakout
Debrief on Whiteboards

Breakout Groups
Breakouts allow us to divide participants into small groups for
discussion and collaboration where they can share documents,
screen share, chat with each other, and see and hear each other
on video and audio. I think back to how cumbersome it used to
be to conduct audio breakouts with an audio bridge when we
facilitated virtual training in 2000. We were required to press
multiple number combinations and the hashtag into our analog
phones to enter an audio-only breakout, and then press another
combination to be returned to the main session. To conduct
breakouts, we had to manually divide people by name and then
tell them what group they were in and the respective number
combination each group would need to enter into their phones.
This meant the audio connection was separate from the visual
connection to the internet.
Today, Adobe Connect, Zoom, Webex, and other virtual
training platforms have made it astonishingly easy for us to
click a button and enter small group breakouts with quality
video and audio (Figure 7-14). Small-group breakout sessions
are common now in most web conferencing platforms.
According to the 2021 ATD virtual training research report,
more than 80 percent of talent development professionals
reported small group activities (like breakouts) as the top
learning activity. Breakouts offer many affordance, including
small group discussions, collaboration, brainstorming, and
problem solving.

Breakouts can create anxiety for some facilitators who
worry about not placing learners correctly in groups or being
able to bring them back to the main session. For this reason, I
work with clients to help them practice breakouts during their
teach-backs. This way they learn how to manage them in a
safe, small environment and then they realize can do it. Later,
some even comment about how fun it is to pop into learners’
breakouts and see how they’re doing.
Figure 7-14. Zoom Example of Small Breakout Group
Breakouts primarily emphasize the social dimension of
learning. Together in small groups, learners can collaborate
with one another. Breakouts also incorporate the cognitive
dimension of learning as participants use their mental
resources to work on activities. As mentioned before, the
behavioral dimension is the doing. So, if the breakouts involve
an activity where learners are creating an action plan, writing a
report, evaluating a presentation, solving a challenging
scenario, or doing a skill practice of delivering constructive
and positive feedback, all these activities are doing. This then
would bring the behavioral dimension of learning into
breakouts.
InSpace has created a platform used by academic
institutions and businesses alike to provide an intuitive, more
free-choice option for navigating in and out of breakouts as a
collaborative learning arena (Figure 7-15). For example,

InSpace allows learners to independently move in and out of
various breakouts. They can also come out of a breakout to ask
the instructor a question and then return to their breakout
(Figure 7-16).
Figure 7-15. InSpace Example of Breakouts
Figure 7-16. InSpace Example of Self-Navigated
Breakouts
Here are some basic best practices for breakouts:
• Clarify an appropriate timeframe based on the activity.
This way, learners clearly know how long they have to
complete an activity. Allow more time than you think

participants need to give them the buffer to greet each
other, get acclimated to working together, and make
conversation. One of the most common errors I see
beginner facilitators do is assign too many things for a
group to do in a breakout with too little time in which to
do them.
• Keep group size to three or four participants. This way no
one can hide, and everyone has an opportunity to
contribute in a space that feels less intimidating by sheer
number.
• Throw them a lifeline before breakouts begin. Let them
know how they can get a hold of you while they are in
breakouts. Participants may feel disconnected to you
when they go there for the first time without you.
• Always send a broadcast message warning when you will
end sessions. Give a two-minute warning to prompt
conversation wrap-ups so the breakout end is not abrupt.
Some platforms provide 10- to 30-second countdown
warnings before breakouts are closed.
Here are a few more intermediate best practices for
breakouts:
• Allow those who would prefer it the option to work alone
(without calling them out as introverts). This can be better
for learning if someone is anxious about working in a
group and would learn more working independently.
• Strategically pick group facilitators depending on the
activity. I handpick leaders based on my observations of
their earlier participation (they do not realize this). I watch
for demonstrated leadership and then ask aloud for their
permission to facilitate the group. This saves precious
time, so that people don’t use up all their breakout time
deciding how to get started. Instead they can jump into the
exercise immediately if a selected leader is already
identified. If you have a learner who early on
demonstrates a poor attitude for being there, they would
not be the best pick for leading the breakouts.

• Ask the group to choose their own facilitator; this plays off
the learner agency we discussed in chapter 4. If you do
this, build in extra time, because it can require a little time
for a group—especially if they don’t yet know each other
—to select a facilitator. In other instances, you may not
need a facilitator because a learner is practicing their
virtual presentation with a partner. So, it depends on the
type of activity in the breakout as well.
• Give crystal-clear instructions three times, three ways.
Author Kassy Laborie (2021) also separates the technical
instructions from the activity’s instructions to help
communicate both more clearly.
• Allow independent choice for which breakout to enter
when your platform allows. The more autonomy we can
provide learners, the better. This means learners are
allowed to enter and exit breakouts as needed.
• Always build in time during the first breakouts with a
given class for learners to at least say hi and share their
first name. Even if you don’t tell them to do this, most
will do it naturally.
• Do pop in occasionally to visit breakouts, check on
completion status, and ensure conversations are on track.
• Debriefs are often more important than the breakouts—so
almost always include them. This is the opportunity to
connect what they’re learning with the real world or their
work back on the job.
PRO TIP 56
Ensure breakout activity instructions are clearly
understood before starting them, and always
debrief afterward as the connections realized are often
even more important.
Table 7-1 shares a list of suggested activities for each virtual
tool. Let’s take a moment to review these tools.
Table 7-1. List of Suggested Activities and Ideas for
Virtual Tools

Virtual
Platform
Tool
Description
Activities and Ideas
Chat
This is a dedicated instant
messaging space that
allows participants,
facilitator, and producer to
send typed text messages
publicly or privately to each
other in real time.
Use chat to collect multiple
ideas from a wide variety of
learners by posing open-
ended prompts to them. For
example, for a virtual
training leadership course,
ask participants to post in
chat some of the qualities
they’ve observed in effective
leaders. Always provide an
example to get them started.
For example, you might say
“visionary” or “influential.”
Virtual hand
raising
Learners click a hand raise
icon to indicate to
facilitators that they have a
question or comment, or
they’ve raised their hand in
response to a question.
When you first introduce
learners to a topic, use the
“Raise Your Hand If …”
activity. Ask three or four
questions related to the
topic and tell them, “I’m
going to say a statement
and if it’s true for you, raise
your virtual hand.” You can
even make the last
statement a joke or
something that makes them
laugh. For example, if you
are training on emotional
intelligence, you might say
“Raise your hand if you’ve
ever lost it emotionally with
anyone. You can lower
those hands now.” “Raise
your hand if you know what
EQ is. I see those hands
going up, you can lower
them now.” “Raise your
hand if you can explain the
difference between EQ and
IQ,” etc.
Reaction
feedback
Based on the various
virtual training platforms,
these vary widely but
include icons, emoticons,
animated reactions, green
check, or red x to quickly
communicate participants’
reactions.
You can have a lot of fun
with the gesture recognition
animations, emoticons, and
even animated gestures like
thumbs up. In the middle of
training (as a pick me-up
energizer), ask learners to
use their emoticons to tell

you how they’re feeling
about the content and if it
makes sense to them.
Emoticons can help you
discern if they’re confused,
and thumbs up tells you
things are going in the right
direction. It’s a way to keep
a pulse on the group.
Screen
sharing
This allows facilitators
and/or participants to share
their current view of
documents, files, systems,
videos, and websites from
their own device with
everyone in the virtual
class.
When you train learners on
technical systems or teach
them procedural content,
you can take advantage of
screen sharing. Either in
large groups or small
breakouts, learners can
practice the how of what
they are learning by taking
turns sharing their screen
and practicing in the system.
It’s very important to set
them up for success by
explaining and slowly
modeling it for them first. If
they have access to a
testing environment, they
can take turns sharing
screens and each walking
through another part of the
process as review and
practice. If there are
junctures where learners are
unsure what to do next, the
group at large can assist by
deciding what to do next.
This is a great opportunity
for repetitive practice and
corrective feedback, both of
which boost learning.
Document
upload
Instead of sharing your
screen to show PDFs or
slides or other files and
documents, they can be
uploaded ahead of time
and conveniently stored in
the platform. This way they
are ready for you to select
and share at the time you
need them.
Almost everyone loves
review games. The energy
of competing on teams or
even working as a large
group to see if they can play
for points always adds a
nice edge to the training and
builds helpful recall time for
working memory too. You
can create a separate slide
deck building off popular
game shows to come up

with slides that ask
questions related to your
training topic for a review
game.
Randomizer
This tool once clicked can
randomly select a name
from a participant list in real
time and display it for all to
see in a matter of seconds.
Use the randomizer to select
a participant’s name for a
drawing or giveaway. For
example, everyone who
submits their action plans by
the end of class will be
included in a drawing for a
prize. Then at the end of
class, use the randomizer to
select the winner.
Annotation
tools
These are commonly called
drawing tools and allow a
facilitator and participants
to annotate or highlight,
draw, point, use arrows,
erase, clear all annotations,
and more on whiteboards,
slides, and videos,
depending on the platform.
When you are teaching a
topic like business writing or
business grammar, display a
slide for learners that is a
paragraph they can easily
read and see. Then instruct
them to use their annotation
tools to find all the business
grammar errors in the
sample writing displayed
onscreen. For a more
orderly collaboration, you
can have them take turns in
small groups as they find
additional errors that need
correcting in the sample.
Live polling
Allows participants to
respond to survey
questions where results are
collected and may be
shared with participants in
real time and saved for
future reference.
One of the best ways to use
polling for learning is to
leverage it as a check-your-
knowledge quiz as you go
along. This provides a built-
in way to measure whether
concepts are clear, learners
are grasping the content, or
where correction is needed.
Create polls ahead of time
for easier management and
always broadcast results
with the group. Participants
will be curious about where
they stand with everyone
else.
Video clip
playback
Depending on the platform,
video clips can be played
I recommend offloading
videos as viewing

back for participants to
view either through built-in
video players for better
quality or by sharing one’s
screen of the video.
asynchronous assignments
before coming to class. This
way, the video stimulates
their thinking on the topic
beforehand. However, if you
want to reinforce parts of the
video again or show brief
clips, you can also annotate
right on the video in some
virtual training platforms.
Feel free to start and stop to
allow for group discussions
on the video topic in
between collective viewing.
Countdown
timer
This tool is a convenient
way to set a timer for any
activity that can be shared
and visible to everyone in
class as it counts down.
Countdown timers are
helpful for timed
independent exercises and
can also be set when class
adjourns for a break. Set the
timer for five minutes, for
example, so everyone is
clear on the break start and
end time across time zones.
Virtual
whiteboards
This is a digital empty white
space used for free
drawing by participants and
facilitators. They can type
text, draw, create tables,
erase, and more. In most
platforms, facilitators can
also move typed text
around to be more clearly
read. It is used in tandem
with the annotation toolbar.
In many platforms,
whiteboards can be saved
for future reference as well.
Using the annotation
toolbar’s straight lines, draw
a line down the center and a
line across the top making a
“T” intersection. In the left
column, request learners
type a key takeaway they’re
going to start doing from the
training. In the right column,
ask learners to type
something they were
already doing that the
training validated or
reinforced for them.
Breakouts
Enables a large group to
divide into multiple smaller
groups to discuss and
collaborate with audio, live
video, shared documents,
whiteboards, shared
screens, and more.
Give each small breakout
the option to select from one
of two problem-solving
scenarios. Using the
concepts and techniques
learned in the training, they
need to decide as a group
how they’re going to
address the problem and
resolve the situation.

Summary
You have many interactive tools to leverage for virtual
training. When used strategically, they can optimize learner
engagement, increase participant attention, and promote
deeper learning. Using these tools strategically starts with
having a rationale for when and why the tool is used. We want
to move beyond the basics of using something just because it’s
there. Rather, we aim to have a thoughtful rationale for when,
why, and how we might use a tool to support the intended
outcome and learner goals.
Basic tools like chat, raising virtual hands, feedback
options, and more provide opportunities for building online
community and connection. Intermediate tools like polling and
video as well as advanced tools like whiteboards and
breakouts allow for real-time interaction and collaboration.
And some tools—like the annotation toolbar—use movement
as its ally.
In the next chapter, we’ll uncover the dynamic principle,
another strategy to captivate and focus attention. All these tips
and strategies work together as one to captivate, direct, and
focus learners so that they can absorb, and ideally transfer
what they’ve learned to the workplace.
Overall, developing your fluency with virtual technical tools
gives you the knowledge and skills to understand their unique
affordances and optimize them for learning. As you continue
to raise the bar as a virtual facilitator, challenge yourself to
leverage platform tools while observing what works best and
reflecting on why. Keep up to date on the latest enhancements
and evolving technologies, as these improvements inform our
future designs. Developing your capability in technical fluency
is not only a core business skill, but will also significantly
improve your ability to deliver interactive and engaging virtual
training programs.
Pro Tips for Practicing your
Technical Fluency Skills

TIP
48
Once learners successfully use a virtual tool, the more likely
they are to use it again.
TIP
49
Leverage chat for immediate responses to prompts that a
learner can answer in a brief phrase or with a few words.
TIP
50
Request learners use the raise virtual hand feature for quick
responses or when they have a comment or question.
TIP
51
Encourage learners to use reaction feedback to communicate
in real time in a fun way.
TIP
52
Leverage screen sharing to share clarifying visuals, provide
examples, or illustrate the instructional content.
TIP
53
For large group discussions, close slide sharing and invite all
participants to come on camera.
TIP
54
Use live annotation such as highlighting, circling, arrows, or
the laser pointer to direct learners’ focus to key elements of a
supporting visual.
TIP
55
Leverage whiteboards for synchronous brainstorming and for
activities that involve contribution by multiple participants
concurrently.
TIP
56
Ensure breakout activity instructions are clearly understood
before starting them, and always debrief afterward as the
connections realized are often even more important.

“Every body perseveres in its state of being at rest or of
moving uniformly straight forward, except insofar as it is
compelled to change its state by forces impressed.”
—Sir Isaac Newton, physicist and mathematician

Following the Dynamic
Principle of Engagement
Imagine you have joined a virtual training session on
emotional intelligence. Your eyes scan the screen on your
device to see who else has joined. You hear the producer
welcome everyone, go over a few ground rules, and then
introduce the facilitator. The facilitator at this point proceeds
to provide a rather lengthy introduction about their own
experience on the topic.
As slide sharing begins, you notice the first slide is quite
text heavy. The facilitator says the purpose of this training is to
learn how to manage emotions well when working with
colleagues and customers. They proceed to drone on in a
monotone voice. Five minutes later, the initial slide still
displays, and the facilitator begins to explain the different
types of emotions. You glance toward the virtual platform’s
chat and see no activity.
Finally, the slide changes to another one but is just as full of
text and bullet points. After a while, all the slides begin to look
the same. So, you decide to respond to a few emails and finish
prepping for that meeting you’re leading later. As you work,
you keep a partial ear open for anything that might be of
interest, and, of course, in case they happen to call on you.
You begin thinking about what to make for dinner, and
suddenly remember you forgot to schedule your pet’s
grooming appointment. Clearly, your attention has drifted to a
galaxy … far, far away.
Sound familiar? Would you want this virtual training to
come to a theatre near you? Unfortunately, when virtual

training doesn’t grab our attention, something else will.
Boredom for live online learners translates to disengagement.
We lose their interest. We lose their attention. We lose them.
When a learner disengages, they seek out other stimuli. For
example, instead of sitting through a training they find boring,
they might check their phone for messages, shop online, or
respond to email. In today’s world with a workforce that works
from anywhere, the myriad distractions can pull learners’
attention away from learning. Even in office buildings, we can
experience distractions from colleagues, fire alarm tests, loud
meetings, and so on. Because of smartphones, people also
have immediate access to email and work projects just a
hand’s distance away. In the context of virtual training, their
focus should be the visual and audio stimuli through virtual
training platforms.
As mentioned previously, the top thing virtual facilitators
seem to repeatedly seek an answer to is the age-old problem of
how to engage learners. Virtual trainers will ask, “How do we
prevent learners from multi-tasking?” “How do we make sure
they’re paying attention?” or “How do we keep them
engaged?”
Unfortunately, there is no silver bullet for completely
eradicating learner distractions. Instead of a single strategy, it’s
often a combination of different strategies that works most
effectively. One strategy is to set expectations at the outset of
virtual events for participants to close email, minimize any
unrelated open apps, and silence smartphones if not used
during training. This is just one suggestion. In a live online
setting, facilitators compete for learner attention with the
number of virtual training platform pods on a screen at a given
time. Because of these multiple potential distractions,
“Instructors must work harder to capture learners’ attention,
encourage interaction, and reinforce the key points from the
session” (Bersin 2020).
Moreover, attention is a precious commodity because it is a
critical brain process for learning (Zadina 2014). According to
educational neuroscientist Janet Zadina (2014), “Attention is
the act of selectively attending to some stimuli rather than

other stimuli … it does not mean taking in more information:
it means taking in less. … Attention is the mechanism by
which the brain conserves its resources and focuses on specific
information. This affects what we actually see and hear.” This
poses a fundamental challenge for virtual facilitators and adult
educators. Attention is vital to virtual training because it is
essential to focus, which is needed for learning. To effectively
train online, we must capture and direct learners’ attention.
So, how do we draw virtual learners in and keep them
engaged when multiple distractions compete for their
attention? Quite simply, learner engagement is dynamic. In
this chapter, we’ll explore the dynamic engagement capability
and how it can help us draw in learners’ attention. We can also
improve engagement by leveraging the four learning
dimensions (cognitive, emotional, social, and behavioral) as
discussed previously. Before we get into dynamic principles,
let’s explore some cognitive neuroscience concepts that are
important for engaging learners: habituation and working
memory.
THE BIG IDEA
Leverage the power of movement in multiple
ways to engage learners throughout virtual
training.
Habituation in Live Online Learning
Once, when I was coaching a client, our first meeting was in a
room in a building where he worked. The room happened to
have overhead fluorescent lights that buzzed loudly and a
clock on the wall that made an incessant and obnoxious
ticking noise. We continued to use the same room weekly.
Nearing the end of six weeks, I was surprised to discover that I
didn’t even hear the buzzing or ticking anymore. They were
still there, but I had gotten used to them. I was able to tune
them out.
This phenomenon is part of our built-in survival instinct to
be alerted to new noises in our environment. It’s because we
need to determine whether they are a threat to our well-being

whether (Zadina 2014). Once we determine a new stimulus is
not a threat and become accustomed to it, we stop paying
attention to it. Meet habituation.
What Is Habituation?
According to psychologist David Myers (2014), habituation is
the “decreasing responsiveness with repeated stimulation.”
This means we pay less attention to a stimulus in our
environment the more exposed we are to it. Not only is it part
of our survival instinct, but it’s also part of our adaptability.
Once we determine a stimulus is not a threat, over time we are
able to pay less attention to it. It’s an adaptation gift. With
repeated exposure, a stimuli’s ability to elicit a response is
reduced (APA 2020). Eventually, we may even tune out the
stimulus altogether.
To help us better understand this concept, let’s look at
another example. Let’s say you move to a new neighborhood
near an airport. The noise from the airport is new for you and
keeps you awake several nights in a row. However, after a
while, you find you’ve become desensitized to the noise and
your sleep improves. Eventually you notice you have
completely tuned out the airport noise.
Habituation is an important concept we can also apply to the
learning process. As Julie Dirksen (2012) explains in Design
for How People Learn, “Habituation means getting used to a
sensory stimulus to the point that we no longer notice or
respond to it” (Dirksen 2012). This is what I was able to do
over time in the noisy room.
Applying Habituation to Virtual Training
So how might habituation apply to live online learning and
why is this important? When learners are repeatedly exposed
to the same stimulus, there can be a decrease in their response
to it. In live online learning, there are many opportunities for a
stimulus to become stagnant and not change. For example,
virtual learners might disengage because of monotone
delivery, long introductions, static slides, and never-ending
lecturettes. When this happens, learners can habituate and stop

paying attention. Table 8-1 identifies some of these potential
habituation examples in virtual training and how to address
them.
To remedy the effect of habituation, experiment with ways
to bring more dynamic variety into live online learning (Table
8-1). As discussed in chapter 6, our voices can demonstrate
movement inflection. Additionally, multiple speakers or a
producer who also works as a facilitative assistant can provide
another voice to the mix. The greater the contrast between
voices (for example, deeper versus higher), the more interest it
generates as well. Even introducing a podcast-like format to
the virtual training, where you interview a guest expert and ask
them questions for part of the session and take questions from
participants, can inject lots of movement. In addition to
leveraging strategies to avoid habituation, let’s explore how to
capitalize on working memory with dynamic engagement.
Table 8-1. Habituation Examples in Virtual Training
Potential for
Habituation
How to Address
Single slide shown
too long
Only spend a few minutes on a slide visual.
Monotonous
facilitation delivery
Vary vocal delivery with natural inflection that rises
and falls.
Static content on
slide
Progressively build slide visuals with animation.
Annotate by circling or highlighting key content.
All slides are bullet
points or text heavy
and look the same
Vary how content is presented. Use diagrams or
charts for descriptive content and bullet points for
factual content.
Lecture-style
delivery
Look for opportunities to interject a variety of
activities, including interactive ones, relevant to
content and learner goals.
Mostly one voice
talks for the duration
Leverage a producer as a second voice with more
of a co-facilitative role, or work with co-facilitators
to add two voices. Incorporate large group
discussions and breakouts where participants are
actively sharing.

PRO TIP 57
Employ strategies to avoid learner habituation.
Working Memory
Working memory is your active thinking. It is “a central
element of human cognition responsible for active processing
of data during thinking, problem solving, and learning” (Clark
and Kwinn 2007). It is what you are using right now to read
this book. For any of this information to be encoded into your
long-term memory for later retrieval, it must first go through
your working memory.
The most important thing you need to know about working
memory is that it has a limited capacity. This might seem odd
to you, but it has a purpose. With limitations, it must be
efficient. Working memory’s job is not to store everything you
were ever exposed to for all of time. Instead, “working
memory has a relatively short duration and limited capacity,
but you use it pretty much constantly throughout the day”
(Dirksen 2012). In addition to a limited capacity, it also has
limits with the duration of storage. This has ramifications for
learning. As Ruth Clark and Ann Kwinn (2007) clarify in The
New Virtual Classroom: Evidence-Based Guidelines for
Synchronous e-Learning, “Because humans have a very
limited working memory, instructional professionals must
diligently conserve students’ memory capacity for learning
purposes.”
Cognitive Load
Because working memory has a limited capacity, at times
learners can become overwhelmed while learning. This is
cognitive load, or the amount of mental processing or brain
effort required by working memory. There are three types of
cognitive load: extraneous, intrinsic, and germane (Sweller,
van Merrienboer, and Paas 1998). Extraneous load comes from
how we present content. It can impose extra mental work
irrelevant to the learning goal and by doing so wastes mental
resources that could have been used for germane load (Clark,
Nguyen, and Sweller 2006). An example is when when we

include extra nonessential information on a slide visual.
Intrinsic load is the internal complexity inherent in the content
itself. Attempting to understand the complexity can also use
up learners’ precious working memory resources. Germane
load, however, is the good stuff. This is the load we want to
impose on learners because this is when they are actively
engaged in creating mental models, forming new schemas for
the content they are learning about, and attaching it to their
prior knowledge on the topic. As Clark and Kwinn (2007)
summarize, “Cognitive load can come from the difficulty of
the instructional content, the manner in which instructional
materials are organized and displayed, and the mental
processes required to achieve the learning goal.”
As a result, we want to free up as much working memory
resources as possible for germane load, and to do this, we must
reduce extraneous load and manage intrinsic load. Thankfully,
both are under our control as facilitators and developers. For
example, we can remove nonessential visual elements on
slides. We can also introduce complex content with just the
overarching structure first and then gradually share more
details to scaffold the complexity. Additionally, Clark and
Kwinn (2007) recommend the following to manage cognitive
load in virtual training, “keep sessions relatively brief, heavily
interactive, and reliant on visuals explained by instructor
narration to deliver content.”
We also want to adhere to evidence-based principles, like
the redundancy principle that reminds us to avoid adding a lot
of text to slides that is repeated with the facilitator’s live audio
(Clark, Nguyen, and Sweller 2006). Instead, allow the
facilitator’s verbal explanation to supplement the imagery and
diagrams illustrated on a slide with key text phrases or words.
By avoiding this redundancy, you improve learning for virtual
participants. As we keep the flow moving and keep sessions
highly interactive with effective supporting visuals, we
leverage dynamic movement to minimize overloading
learners’ working memories.
The Dynamic Principle of Engagement

Movement naturally calls attention to itself. This truth is the
underpinning for what I call the dynamic principle of
engagement. It is when facilitators use movement of various
means to intentionally engage learners and their virtual
participants. This principle implores virtual trainers to
creatively think of ways to purposefully and strategically use
movement, variety, and change to draw in learners and capture
and sustain their attention. As international consultant David
Sousa (2011) summarizes, “You cannot recall what you have
not stored.” So, how do we entice learners to be attentive so
they can actively encode new information?
Imagine for a moment that someone just walked into the
space where you are. What do you do? You likely turn and
look toward the new movement. But why? Why did you turn
and look? We turn because it’s novel, it’s a change in our
current environment, and we’re curious who it is and from
where the sound originated. More importantly, we’re also
wired to notice new stimuli in our environment as part of our
survival instinct. “The human brain is wired for detecting
motion” (Bersin 2020). When something changes in our view
or in our environment, our survival instincts kick in and we
pay attention to determine whether it is a threat. As author
Nancy Duarte (2008) notes, “When things move, the eye is
drawn to them like a moth to light. It’s unavoidable. Humans
are hard-wired to look when things move, primarily from the
innate fight-or-flight instinct. They will process what moves
and make sure they’re not in danger.”
Because of this, we can introduce strategic movement to
call learners’ attention. The goal, however, with live online
learning is to incorporate balanced movement. By this, I mean
that there is a point when movement is too excessive.
Excessive movement weakens its power as an attention-getting
tool. Just as using too much salt for seasoning food spoils the
taste but when used in moderation greatly improves it, so also
we can spoil the effect if movement is excessive.
We want to leverage this instinct to fully focus on any new
type of movement for learning. Our virtual training sessions
should be dynamic, not static. In other words, we can use
movement to gain learners’ full attention throughout virtual

training. And the reason we want to capture and sustain their
full attention is because attention is critical to learning. If
learners are not attentive, they cannot absorb, process, and
retain the new content or create new mental schemas. Let’s
now apply the dynamic principle to some other aspects of
virtual training.
PRO TIP 58
Keep the flow of live online sessions dynamic, not
static.
Applying the Dynamic Principle to Vocal
Variety
As we learned in chapter 6, selective word emphasis and
varying your pitch or speaking with natural inflection are ways
to create movement and thus learner engagement. For
example, what you choose to emphasize and how you do so
when delivering virtual training can have an outsized impact
on whether learners pay attention throughout the session or
tune you out. Simply put, what’s best for keeping learners
engaged is variety. You can slow down on key points and even
repeat them for added emphasis, while speaking faster (but not
too fast) on the things they already know a bit about.
Throughout all of it, use vocal inflection (leverage the natural
ups and downs in your vocal range). Building on this, let’s
explore some additional ways to add vocal variety and
movement into your virtual training programs by inviting
learners’ voices, using multiple facilitators, and elevating the
producer role.
Invite Learners’ Voices
Hearing from learners and inviting them to share either aloud
or in chat not only aids their ability to process the information
but can also be more interesting for others because of the vocal
variety. But what can a facilitator do when learners are quiet?
Let’s explore next how you might incent learners to talk and
share. It’s important to note that chat is also an oral medium,
as we discussed in chapter 7. As you may have noticed, some
learners (especially introverts) may feel more comfortable

contributing in chat only. This is certainly acceptable because
in this way they still have a voice. To add greater vocal variety,
however, for those who do wish to speak aloud, how can you
incent them to talk? Here are some tactics you can apply:
• Assign pre-work or pre-class activities. These
assignments can whet learners’ appetite, so they are more
prepared to converse on the subject and have formulated
questions on the topic that pique their interest. For
example, you might have them view a video or read a
published article.
• Overtly invite their expertise. Learners recognize the
unspoken authority of a facilitator in the presumed
hierarchy of a class. They may assume that the facilitator
is the authority on the subject. Yet learners also bring
insights, professional experiences, great questions, and
expertise to every virtual class. When we genuinely and
overtly say, “I want to hear your great ideas” or “You all
have professional experience with this. What are your
thoughts?” learners are more likely to share.
• Place them in breakouts early. In a breakout of three to
four individuals, people are not able to hide or passively
participate in virtual training. They get into a flow after
getting over their initial inertia, as we discussed in chapter
4, and begin to enter fluid conversation. The beauty is that
when they return from breakouts, they are now warmed
up. You may even observe elevated energy levels.
Because they were just talking, they’re more likely to talk
again. I strategically place thoughtful discussion questions
a short time after breakout debriefs while the open
exchange is still flowing.
• Modify your course to be a blended learning solution.
While chapter 11 is dedicated to this very topic, let’s
touch on it briefly here. A blended learning virtual
training program incorporates both asynchronous and
synchronous elements. When you offer a blended
solution, employees are more invested by their
participation in a previous discussion thread, after
listening to a podcast they had questions about, or after

completing a reflection. These offline, additional activities
can spawn greater and richer sharing during the live
online sessions.
• Build working relationships. Relational learning—where
learners know you care about them and have had a chance
to meet you previously—can also bolster participants’
comfort level in speaking up during class. For some of my
more robust programs, I offer virtual office hours or
schedule brief one-on-one tech checks. Participants may
feel more comfortable after viewing a welcome video
from you, or if you’ve asked them to introduce themselves
in a discussion thread inside a course management system
before the first live class. The more comfortable they are
with you, the more likely they are to speak up during
class.
• Pre-class conversation. Encourage learners to join five to
10 minutes early in your pre-communication messaging.
Seize the opportunity to talk with them casually and
welcome a few of them by name when they join, such as,
“Welcome Wei and Imani—great to have you here!”
• Apply the wait-time principle. We discussed this in
chapter 4. After you pose a question, wait up to six
seconds for a response. This gives learners time to think
and craft a reaction (Rowe 1986). Allow for extra time in
chat too. They need to first think about what you’re
asking and then type and send.
• Give advance warning that you’ll call on learners. I
always like to prepare learners ahead of time if I’m going
to call on them by name. This sets them up for success.
I’ll let them know in a little bit I’ll be calling on them and
then I give them time to think about and complete the
exercise before choosing individuals to share what
they’ve discovered. For example, you might ask, “Clara,
what about you? What has resonated the most with you so
far and why?”
• Be mindful of what you do after learners share. If you
say nothing after someone shares, or if you say “Anyone
else?” without some type of acknowledgment, they may

feel like they were ignored. Also, when the facilitator says
trite comments like “thanks for that”—especially
repetitively—it can come across as rote and sterile, as
discussed in chapter 4. It’s better to briefly acknowledge
what was shared by asking a follow-up question,
paraphrasing, reacting in a way that builds on it, or
making a related comment. For example, you might say
“Antonio, that’s a great example! Tell us more about how
you think that might work.” Learners are watching how
you treat others, knowing they will be treated in a similar
way if they decide to share. This impacts their
interpretation of a safe space free of ridicule and their
willingness to also come forward.
• Model sharing first. Tell an on-topic story from your
professional experience. The rules of reciprocity are at
play here. When you divulge one of your own
professional experiences tied to the topic at hand, it opens
the space for more vulnerability and sharing. Then others
are more likely to follow and share too. For example,
when I was teaching a class on assertiveness, I shared a
story about how I was once refused a jewelry repair even
though I was told the piece would have a lifetime
guarantee of repairs at the time of purchase. I asked my
learners what they thought a passive customer response
and an aggressive customer response might look like in
this scenario. Then I shared what I did at the retailer by
applying the assertive techniques we were discussing. As
a result, the jeweler agreed to let me select another item as
a replacement. After sharing that story, others came
forward with their own assertive stories from which we
could all learn.
Use Multiple Facilitators for More Vocal Variety
Adding multiple facilitators is another way to add movement
through vocal variety. This is contingent naturally on class size
and available resources. When appropriate, multiple voices
can be valuable because learners no longer habituate to one
facilitative voice, as discussed earlier in the chapter. There are
many ways you can leverage multiple voices. These include

inviting a guest expert, an internal SME, a senior leader, or a
co-facilitator to assist with part of your virtual training
program. Let’s explore each further.
Invite a Guest Expert
One way to add greater voice variety is to invite a guest expert
to briefly join your virtual class. This allows learners to hear
directly from the expert in real time. For instance, if you have
been studying leadership development and have been reading
a leadership book as part of the course work, you might invite
the author to speak for 30 minutes. Or you might ask a world-
renowned expert on leadership to join your class for 15–30
minutes. And, because you are not limited by physical
proximity in live online learning, your guest experts can be
anywhere in the world.
Another technique that works well with guest experts is to
conduct a live interview. You, as the facilitator, could begin by
asking questions collected from learners and sent to the expert
ahead of time on the topic. From there, learners would have
the opportunity to ask live questions by coming off mute or
submitting them through chat. This interview style always
works well and is not only captivating but a great attention-
getting technique. You can see the inherent movement built
into this method as questions and answers go back and forth in
real time. People are naturally baited and curious about the
expert’s answers to each question.
Some of the downsides of working live with someone
anywhere in the world include having to carefully coordinate
language translation, time zones, scheduling logistics, and
technology glitches. Many platforms have language translation
abilities or captions, which can help with language barriers.
From a technical perspective, the best time for an expert to
join is before the session begins or after an extended break.
This allows time to connect with the expert and troubleshoot
technology issues either before class begins or during the
break, so your guest is ready to go when learners return. It is
also important to ensure that the guest is informed and updated
on what the learners have been discussing so far on the topic,

so the guest can connect their own comments to what
participants have been learning.
Invite an Internal Subject Matter Expert
You can also invite an internal subject matter expert (SME) to
log in— preferably during an extended break to ensure their
connection is working—and talk with learners right after the
break. Depending on the topic of the virtual learning class, the
SME may be able to provide not only vocal variety but also a
different perspective. Let’s say, for example, that you were
training a virtual class on how to be a skilled project manager.
You might ask one of your organization’s seasoned and best
skilled project managers to make a guest appearance during
and share some of their best practices, lessons learned, and
roadblocks to avoid, which will connect back to the techniques
you discussed in class. One downside of this is having to
troubleshoot for technical issues with the connection.
Additionally, working through the logistics of different time
zones is also worth careful thought. As mentioned previously,
the SME should be informed of the key points that have been
discussed in the virtual class up to this point so that they can
connect their comments to what participants have been
learning.
Invite a Senior Leader or Executive to Make a Guest
Appearance
You could also invite a senior leader or executive to make a
guest appearance. For example, if you were conducting a
leadership development virtual training session, a senior leader
might join at the beginning to kick off the session by thanking
participants for their leadership, acknowledging the important
role leaders play, explaining why this training is so important
to the company, and talking about how the outcomes of this
class tie into the long-term strategic goals of the organization.
A downside of incorporating a senior leader is that they may
be interested in staying for the duration, although this is rare
for an executive. This may suppress learner engagement
because they tend to be more participative when senior leaders
are not present and more quiet when they’re there. Sometimes,

just being frank with senior leadership about this can be
helpful. They may agree to come for a time and then leave to
allow more openness and sharing.
Invite a Co-Facilitator to Co-Train
Another way to include more voices in your virtual training is
to work with a co-facilitator who is credible and has expertise
on the topic. Each of you could each take turns facilitating
different portions of the virtual training, which provides a
natural contrast in vocal tones for learners. I have partnered
with co-facilitators and found it easier to share the work, as
well as being enjoyable and fun, and certainly more interesting
for learners. When we worked together, we were also able to
alternate playing the producer role for each other, although
you could also work with a producer who then supports both
learners and co-facilitators.
PRO TIP 59
Use multiple facilitators to add vocal movement
and greater interest through vocal variety.
Elevate the Seasoned Producer’s Role for More
Vocal Variety
Depending on your topic and their experience as a producer,
your virtual training producers may even be able to play a
more involved facilitative role. According to virtual training
expert Kassy LaBorie (2021), facilitative producers manage
the technical aspects of the training, but also play a supportive
role teaching segments as needed. Depending on the skill level
of producers I’ve worked with, I have experimented with
involving them in more facilitative roles in various ways. The
longer you work with a producer, the more trust you develop
in your partnership and the more added duties you can explore
sharing. For example, I’ve strategically included some of my
producers as another voice not just at the beginning or end, but
also during the training sessions to intentionally add more
vocal interest. You’ll need to discern their ability to do this,
however, as novice producers may be too overwhelmed to take
on extra responsibilities. In my experience, seasoned
producers handle this well, provided it’s later on in the training

when most technical issues have been resolved and we have
reached smoother waters.
One producer I had the good fortune to work with was
exceptionally experienced. We had worked together so many
times that I trusted her with everything and knew she could
solve almost any virtual training issue. The online class I was
teaching at the time was an active listening course for a
Fortune 500 company. I asked my producer ahead of time if
she would be willing to share a story about her experience
watching the total solar eclipse in 2017. She agreed. After all,
it was an active listening class. I thought this would be a great
opportunity for learners to apply the listening techniques we
had just discussed while a new voice shared her story. The
producer explained that she was in the path of totality and saw
the moon completely cover the sun for approximately 2.5
minutes. She went on to share that everything suddenly grew
dark, and the crickets started chirping even though it was the
middle of the day. After she shared her story, I quizzed
learners on the key points of the story and it became a rich
discussion example for what active listening techniques they
applied and how it worked for them. Evidently, the fact that I
still remember what she said all these years later shows that I
was actively listening too! The point is, as a virtual facilitator,
you can leverage your experienced producers to assist with
things beyond just managing the technical aspects. This is a
way to add movement that draws attention through vocal
variety.
Another time, I asked a different producer if she would be
willing to share a brief professional story during our virtual
class on effective storytelling for leaders. The advantage to
this was threefold. It was a way to generate more interest
through a new voice, it was an opportunity to check learners’
knowledge and practice recall, and it served as an example.
Certainly, hearing the prominence of a new voice piqued
learners’ attention. Before she began, I asked them to type the
one-word tenets we had learned about effective storytelling in
the chat while she progressed through her story. This exercise
was strategically placed right before learners practiced

outlining their own stories in independent breakouts, where I
could pop in and check on their progress.
By inviting learners’ voices; being open to guest experts,
internal SMEs, senior leaders, or co-facilitators; and elevating
the verbal role of a seasoned producer, you can add vocal
variety and dynamism to virtual training.
Applying the Dynamic Principle to Visuals
If you have ever attended an hour-long webinar that used a
total of six static slides, you have experienced death-by-
webinar. Visuals are important to clarify and explain concepts
and other types of information, but when left up too long at a
time or when they display something that is no longer being
discussed, they lose their effectiveness. One strategy you can
use is to reveal the visual at the time you talk about it—not
long before you talk about it or long after you’ve stopped
talking about it.
There is evidence-based research to support visuals’ aid to
learning when they are designed and used appropriately.
“Effective visuals engage learners, promote learning, and help
to reduce mental load” (Clark and Kwinn 2007). Creating
effective visuals for your live online learning classes requires
visual literacy skills. One thing you want to keep in mind is
not to use a visual for the sake of using a visual. Just because
your virtual training platform allows you to share slides
doesn’t mean you always need them. For example, during
lengthy group discussions, I like to stop sharing slides and
invite learners to just come on camera. You don’t need to
prepare a slide for everything you say or have one on display
all the time. Use supporting visuals when your content calls
out for greater clarity and to anchor learners to the key points
you’re making.
PRO TIP 60
Use visuals to add variety to your virtual training
when the instructional content calls out for more
clarity.
Use Progressive Builds

Progressive builds are one way to create movement. This
means gradually revealing more and more complexity on a
slide through animated entrances at the time that you speak
about them (Figure 8-1). Instead of displaying all the content
on your slide at one time (text, graphics, images, and so on),
you can reveal certain elements gradually. This scaffolding
movement of unveiling a new part of the slide naturally draws
the learner’s attention and builds curiosity for what’s coming
next. More importantly, it aligns with Richard Mayer’s
temporal contiguity principle, which states that people learn
better when corresponding animation and narration are
presented at the same time (Mayer and Fiorella 2014). This
technique also avoids cognitively overloading your learners by
only displaying the most relevant part of your slide visual at
the time you explain it.
Note that some virtual platform technologies may not
display progressive builds or animations on slides once they
are uploaded. For example, when I trained a virtual class using
Blackboard Collaborate, I had several animation layers built
into my slides that I knew would aid learning. With novice
learners especially, you want to gradually build in complexity
by scaffolding, so as not to overwhelm them with complexity
all at once. However, at the time, if I uploaded my PowerPoint
slides through Share Files, it would not display my animations
in this mode. Because I felt it was important to show my
animations, I used Share Application instead. This way, when
I chose to share my PowerPoint application onscreen, my
animations displayed and then learners could see my
progressive builds.
Figure 8-1. Slide Example of a Progressive Build

PRO TIP 61
Progressively construct complex slide visuals in
real time with animated builds.
Create Movement With Annotation and the
Signaling Principle
Building on our discussion of annotation in chapter 7,
annotation is a very useful tool for learning. In addition to
inviting learners to select the text tool from the annotation
toolbar to type text or draw for any whiteboard learning
activities, facilitators can also use annotation to highlight
visual content as they discuss it. For example, you can use
annotation to draw learners’ attention to where they should
focus on a visual. You could highlight the part of the slide
you’re referencing by drawing arrows or circling it with the
digital highlighter or pencil from the annotation toolbar. In
some platforms, if the annotation toolbar isn’t available while
sharing slides in-app, you can share your screen instead and
click the bottom left of the projected slide to use PowerPoint’s
annotation tools. This is also a way to reduce cognitive load.
We preserve limited working memory resources for the
learning content by providing these visual cues to the learner.
In a research study by Richard Mayer and Roxana Moreno
(2003), a narrated animation with visual media was shown
along with intentionally added extraneous facts and some
confusing graphics. For one group, learners were shown where
to look by adding red and blue arrows to the animation in real
time along with other interventions like adding clear headings
to the text. Learners who received the signaled version of this
multimedia presentation performed better on a problem-
solving transfer test than those in the un-signaled control
group. “We refer to this result as a signaling effect: Students
understand a multimedia presentation better when it contains
signals concerning how to process the material.” In terms of
adding cues to direct where to focus through highlighting or
annotation, it appears to help learners select and organize
information.

To aid learning, it’s also important to show the visual that’s
relevant to your verbal explanation at the time you speak about
it to anchor the content. I sometimes observe virtual trainers
who talk about netiquette ground rules while their title slide
displays, or they share a story while we look at a diagram that
has nothing to do with the story, or they ask a discussion
question while we are looking at learning objectives. It is
better for deeper learning when your verbal explanations
match the visual displayed. Distinguished Professor of
Psychology at the University of California, Santa Barbara,
Richard Mayer, calls this the temporal contiguity principle
(Mayer 
and 
Fiorella 
2014). 
It 
involves 
presenting
corresponding animation and narration simultaneously, not one
after another or any other combination. For example, with
PowerPoint slides, when the content being shown does not
match what is being spoken, there is a mismatch. This can
create dissonance for learners. To fix this, a relevant visual
should anchor what you are explaining at the time you explain
it.
Changing the color of your annotation when you work with
a digital pen or highlighter from your toolbar is another natural
differentiator that will draw the eye. Any color that is not
already displayed on the slide would help the annotation stand
out to learners. In Figure 8-2, you can see how the facilitator is
using a highlighter to circle what she’s explaining, as well as
using an arrow pointer. As Mayer and Fiorella (2014) explain,
annotations like arrows can help highlight the key visual
concepts that learners should attend to most.
Figure 8-2. Example of Annotated Trainer Slide

Movement, Rest, Movement
Annotation can be used by virtual facilitators to signal where
learners should focus attention on any type of visual shared on
a platform. What I often see novice trainers do, however, is
continue to move their laser pointer, drawing tool, cursor, or
highlighter in a continuous motion while they talk. This is
excessive and can make learners dizzy. Instead, use the
highlighter or drawing tool to draw attention to where the
learner should focus and then keep the pointer still until it’s
time to note the next important aspect on the slide. It is
dynamic, but not overdone or excessive. Movement, rest,
movement—this fine balance between a variety of visual
movement interlaced with rest can be leveraged as a hook to
capture and sustain learner interest and attention.
Some of my clients have successfully used the cursor in
place of annotation tools to guide learner focus. They move
their cursor to the specific slide they’re sharing via Zoom, for
example, and then move it near the visual content they are
discussing on the slide. This way the cursor serves as a laser
pointer of sorts and helps draw attention.
In virtual training, everything on the platform is a
competing visual. Chat and the live video feed of facilitators
and other learners can compete for visual attention. Annotating
a slide using a highlighter or pen clarifies immediately where

learners should direct their focus. This assists them by
reducing mental overload because they are no longer taxed
with trying to figure out which part of the visual you’re
currently explaining. This then reserves precious working
memory and attention resources for absorbing and processing
content and forming new schemas, which is where their focus
should be. So, the real-time movement created from live
annotations not only can be used to hold learners’ attention but
also to reduce their cognitive load (Clark and Kwinn 2007).
PRO TIP 62
Annotate visuals to focus learners’ attention on
the part you are discussing at the time you
discuss it.
Variety in Visuals Based on Content Type
Movement can even be leveraged in the way visual content is
depicted. Earlier we discussed how learners can habituate after
viewing slide after slide of bullet points, because after a while,
they all look the same. Not only does frequent changing of
slides create movement, which breaks the cycle of habituation,
but this is also accomplished when the slide content is
illustrated in different ways. As explored previously, all forms
of movement grab attention.
Decades ago, Robert E. Horn brilliantly discovered ways to
structure content and visually represent it. According to him,
some of the major content types include facts, concepts,
processes, procedures, and structures (Horn et al. 1969). It can
be helpful to know how to identify a content type because you
can create more effective visuals based on it. For example, a
list of grammar errors for a virtual training class on business
writing is an example of factual content. Facts are best
represented with bullet points. Although bullet points certainly
have their place, they are not appropriate for all content.
Because factual content shows no inherent sequential order or
ranking importance of hierarchy, facts wouldn’t need to be
numbered.
Let’s say you are conducting virtual training on emotional
intelligence; you might use bullet points to list all the major

emotions human beings can experience (such as joy, anxiety,
fear, anger, and sadness). These emotions are facts, so they
don’t need to follow a hierarchical system and don’t need to be
numbered. Thus bullet points are an appropriate way to
represent them on your virtual training slides.
However, let’s now imagine you were training a virtual
class on how to develop productive teams. You want to
include a slide visual of the stages teams progress through that
psychologist Bruce Tuckman developed in the 1960s: forming,
storming, norming, performing, and adjourning (MasterClass
2021). Could you include all five stages as bullet points on a
virtual training slide? You could, but remember, first we want
to determine what type of content this is. Is this content
factual? Structural? A concept? Procedure? No. It is a process
because it has stages that spread over time.
Although bullet points work well for facts, they do not show
the progression or hierarchy. What’s important to visually
show with these five stages is that they progress up a ladder,
but if new conflicts emerge or team members join, you might
return to an earlier stage. Bullet points would not adequately
reflect this. However, if you created a slide with five
rectangles containing the name of each phase and illustrate
them as if you are climbing a ladder, that would be a more
accurate representation. Additionally, arrows could show how
teams can return to previous stages depending on
circumstances like conflict or the arrival of new team
members.
Concepts with definitions and descriptions benefit most
from an analogy or an example contrasted with a non-
example. Processes include successive stages that span over
time; alternatively, procedures follow specific steps to achieve
a desired outcome (Horn et al. 1969). Quick references, job
aids, and other performance support tools often walk
employees through procedures such as how to use project
management software to track your time on a project. Visually,
both processes and procedures benefit from descriptive
diagrams and charts that show these steps with shapes, arrows,
and workflows. To reduce cognitive load for learners,
evidence-based research also suggests how you can improve

learning outcomes when training procedural or process
content. “When teaching processes or procedures, present and
practice related concepts first, followed by the stages of the
process or steps of the procedure” (Clark and Kwinn 2007).
Structural content includes the parts or subparts of a whole
with boundaries (Horn et al. 1969). Because structure can be
visually represented, this content benefits from diagrams that
visually illustrate and clarify the overall structure and its
subcomponent parts.
So, when you design your slides for visual training (see
Table 8-2 for examples), first pause and identify what type of
content you are trying to illustrate. Is it factual, a concept, a
process, a procedure, or structural? Based on the different
types of content, you can then create slides that give a sense of
movement or change. Some will contain bullet points, others
graphs or tables, some flow charts, and others illustrations and
images.
Table 8-2. Visual Representation by Content Type
Horn’s Content
Types
How to Represent Content on Slide Visuals
Facts
Bullet point lists, statements, or tables
Concepts
Image representing the concept or an image and
shapes representing an example and non-
example combined with key words
Process
Visually illustrate stages with flowcharts, shapes,
and arrows and minimal text
Procedure
Visually show procedural steps with flowcharts,
shapes, and arrows and minimal text
Structure
Diagrams, illustrations, or graphics
Remove Extraneous Imagery
We also want to steer clear of overloading learners visually in
your training slides. Remove content from slides that is
extraneous and unrelated to the topic. I once saw someone

justify adding kittens to their slides because they “thought they
were cute.” The kitties were cute but had nothing to do with
the topic. This is an example of extraneous content. If images
or text are irrelevant to the topic, they only add busyness to the
slide and should be removed. According to evidence-based
research, “Slides that incorporate too many decorative or
unrelated thematic visuals do not contribute to learning and
may even depress learning” (Clark and Kwinn 2007).
Everything on the slide should support and clarify the core
message of the visual. As Richard Mayer’s Coherence
Principle articulates, “People learn better when extraneous
material is excluded rather than included” (Atkinson and
Mayer 2004). Presentation development and design expert
Nancy Duarte (2008) also eloquently sums this up in one of
her manifesto theses for powerful visual presentations:
“Practice Design, Not Decoration.”
PRO TIP 63
How you visually depict slide content depends on
what type of content it is.
Applying the Dynamic Principle to Platform
Tools
As we discuss in chapter 7, the virtual trainer has many tools
to use in today’s platforms. It is best practice to familiarize
yourself with all of them and then leverage them for variety
and movement during live online learning. As global talent
analyst Josh Bersin (2020) explains, “enhanced vILT tools
offer a multitude of options to keep the presentation moving
and learners’ brains engaged.” Further, according to author
Julie Dirksen (2012), “Variation can be a useful tool for
maintaining attention, but it should be used in a deliberate and
meaningful way.”
Here are examples of how you can add meaningful dynamic
movement:
• Annotation. Highlighting, circling, or using the cursor
draws eye attention.

• Polls. Opening polls and sharing results visually changes
what’s on the screen and asks learners to get involved.
• Chat. Chats are both a place for stream of consciousness
flow from all participants and a place for them to respond
to direct questions that you or other participants pose.
• Whiteboard. Whiteboards offer real-time attention with
drawing, typing, and annotating.
• Video. Videos by their very nature showcase movement.
Some platforms like Zoom allow you to annotate and
highlight over video.
• Breakouts. Breakouts introduce significant movement as
learners divide into smaller discussion groups.
• Screen sharing. Screen sharing enables everyone to
collaborate on documents in real time, as well as
broadcast visuals, PDFs, websites, files, and more. Live
movement is also visible by gradually building
complexity in slide visuals.
PRO TIP 64
Create dynamic movement by guiding learners to
use a variety of tools in the virtual training
platform.
Take Frequent Refresh Breaks
One of my colleagues mentioned to me in passing that he
didn’t have time to take a break in his two-hour online session.
I mentioned to him that his learners still needed a quick break
and that he needed one too, even if he didn’t think he did.
Always give learners a break. After approximately 45–60
minutes, even a quick stretch break sends more blood to the
brain and refreshes everyone’s focus. Breaks offer an
invaluable opportunity for learners to step away and
rejuvenate before absorbing more.
In your design, you can build in 10-minute refresh breaks
but never announce how long they will be until right before.
This way, if you’re running behind, you can reduce your break
to 5 minutes on the fly. The point is to give them the

opportunity to take a break from their screens even if it’s brief.
For this reason, I encourage them not to check their email
during breaks, even though many still do.
Before sending learners to break, there are a few key points
you can share with them. You always want to clarify the time
on your clock, since there may be slight variances. When you
have global learners, always announce the time zone you’re
using as a reference point. For example, if all my learners are
in Pacific time, I will say what time it is in Pacific time, not
where I am (Eastern time zone, for example). If needed, look
up how to make that conversion in advance of your session.
Before sending learners off to break I might say something
like, “Alright everyone, we’re at 2:45 Eastern time. Let’s take
a five-minute break. We’ll see you back here at 2:50 p.m.
Eastern. Please mute yourselves and turn off your cameras. I
encourage you to get up and move around your home or office
floor. Get a drink or go outside.” Instruct all learners to keep
connections on, but request they mute themselves and turn off
their cameras. Avoid making colleagues stare at an empty
chair or desk space.
You can also play royalty-free music during breaks matches
the professional tone and mood of your virtual training
session. Above all, remember that focused attention requires
effort and is not sustainable over long periods of time. We can
best maintain focused attention with ebb and flow. Interject
more movement and variety by incorporating frequent breaks.
PRO TIP 65
Use breaks to inject movement into your training
and to sustain focused attention.
Summary
Overall, learners run the risk of habituating from repeated
stimuli when our live online sessions are mostly static. This
can happen when facilitators use a monotone voice, display a
single slide until the world seemingly ends, give a mini-
presentation that lasts way too long, use a deck where every
slide starts to look like the one before it, fail to include a
variety of learning activities, or don’t properly leverage

training tools. Why should we care if habituation sets in?
Because if learners habituate, we lose their full attention. And
because attention is essential to learning, we must do
everything we can to entice, motivate, show relevance,
captivate, and sustain full attention online.
As we learned in this chapter, you can leverage the power of
movement in a variety of ways to engage learners. Variety
does not mean chaotic and rapid jumping from one thing to the
next. We want to be dynamic, but not excessively dynamic.
Most online experts agree that switching up visuals or
activities approximately every four minutes works well. While
the amount of time you take before changing it up is less
important, note that there is a rhythm, and when learners are
focused on static content for too long, they lose interest.
Movement must be purposeful and smooth with transitions
that tie everything together.
To apply the dynamic principle in your virtual training
sessions, vary the rhythm using high-energy activities,
independent work, and breakouts. Use signaling to highlight
and cue which part of a visual learners should be looking at
onscreen when it’s explained. Progressively build slide visuals
to support learning and create movement, adding on the
complexity as you go.
Additionally, create variety in the way you present content
based on what type of content it is. Use multiple facilitators to
create vocal variety and garner more interest with co-
facilitators and two voices. Incorporate more visual anchors as
needed, based on when the content calls out for greater clarity.
And leverage a variety of virtual training platform tools to
keep things dynamic and moving in fresh ways. All these
strategies support your development of the dynamic
engagement capability.
Let’s revisit this chapter’s opening scenario. Only this time,
let’s apply the tips and techniques we’ve discussed. Opening
scene, take 2:
Imagine you join a virtual training session on emotional
intelligence. You scan the screen to check out the class
landscape. You notice 11 other attendees, a few of whom

appear to be on camera. The producer of the session begins to
welcome everyone, provides a brief tour of the virtual training
platform, and asks participants to raise their virtual hands and
post the name of the country they’re connecting from. The
facilitator begins to share what’s in it for you in this session
and how this course can help you advance your career by
developing your emotional intelligence.
The facilitator uses a lot of inflection and has great energy
in his voice, and you can tell he’s passionate about emotional
intelligence. This helps you feel excited about it too. He says
that after this training, you’ll be able to manage your own
emotions when working with co-workers and difficult
customers. He shares a professional story of how he was able
to stay calm during a customer service crisis after applying
some of the techniques he’ll be teaching today. You wonder
what techniques those might be, thinking they could help you
with some of the conflicts you’ve had recently with a team
member.
Then the facilitator begins to share a slide and gradually
adds more elements to each slide through animation. He uses a
drawing tool to circle the part of the slide as he’s talking about
it. He next asks participants to type all the emotions they can
think of on the digital whiteboard. You type in a few emotions
using the text typing tool. Occasionally, he also asks for your
responses to open-ended questions in the chat. You were
hoping to respond to a few emails and finish your prep for that
meeting you lead in the morning, but you decide you’ll do that
later.
As you can see, there are distinct differences between this
scenario and the one at the beginning of this chapter. As
virtual facilitators, we prioritize capturing and focusing learner
attention because of one foundational reason: To teach
humans, we need their attention. The front door to learners’
working memory (and, hopefully, long-term memory) is
attention. Dynamic engagement is just one strategy we use to
help learners focus attention. Work to leverage the power of
movement in multiple ways to engage learners throughout live
online learning. As you continue to facilitate live online

sessions, practice developing your capability in dynamic
engagement.
There are also some other things we can do to help learners
focus. One such strategy is to ensure the technology
supporting virtual training does not distract learners. In the
next chapter, we’ll learn about the preventive actions we can
take to minimize and troubleshoot any technical issues you
might encounter. Ideally, we want to do our best to ensure we
keep things running smoothly for everyone.
Pro Tips for Practicing your
Dynamic Engagement Skills
TIP
57
Employ strategies to avoid learner habituation.
TIP
58
Keep the flow of live online sessions dynamic, not static.
TIP
59
Use multiple facilitators to add vocal movement and greater
interest through vocal variety.
TIP
60
Use visuals to add variety to your virtual training when the
instructional content calls out for more clarity.
TIP
61
Progressively construct complex slide visuals in real time with
animated builds.
TIP
62
Annotate visuals to focus learners’ attention on the part you
are discussing at the time you discuss it.
TIP
63
How you visually depict slide content depends on what type of
content it is.
TIP
64
Create dynamic movement by guiding learners to use a variety
of tools in the virtual training platform.
TIP
65
Use breaks to inject movement into your training and to
sustain focused attention.

“Once we truly know that life is difficult—once we truly
understand and accept it—then life is no longer difficult.”
—M. Scott Peck, author, The Road Less Traveled

Troubleshooting and
Recovering With Agility
One day I eagerly joined a virtual training session as an
attendee to learn more about an interpersonal business skills
with my colleagues. The producer began by welcoming us to
the session, shared her enthusiasm for the topic, and then
introduced us to the trainer. After the handoff, the virtual
trainer shared his own background, and then transitioned to the
topic for the day.
Suddenly, mid-sentence, everything went silent. We could
still see the shared slides but could no longer hear the trainer
or see his live camera. A few of us sent chat messages to alert
both producer and trainer of what was happening on our end.
The producer, clearly horrified, told us she was not sure what
had happened, assured us the trainer would soon re-join, and
that she would text him and get back to us. So, as an audience,
we sat in silence and waited. A few attendees posted messages
in chat speculating what might have happened and sharing
their reactions. Moments later, we heard the producer speak
again. She let us know the trainer had lost his internet
connection and was attempting to reconnect. But so far, the
attempts remained unsuccessful.
This is an all-too-common occurrence in virtual training or
virtual anything. Anytime we use electric technology to train
adults—or to do anything for that matter—there’s always the
potential for things to go wrong. This is the reality of working
with technology. As McLuhan and Nevitt (1972) brilliantly
observed in their book TAKE TODAY: The Executive as
Dropout, when you bring in a service, you also bring in a
disservice. There is a reason why help desks, technical

support, and IT departments emerged after computers became
widely adopted. Computers offer great services, but they also
created a need to support, problem solve, and troubleshoot
their disservices.
Virtual training platforms also offer a great service. They
facilitate global connections with people across time, space,
and distance. They provide an effective venue for staff
training, and they significantly reduce travel costs and other
expenditures associated with traditional in-person training. Yet
at the same time, they can also provide a disservice. Even
though we admire technology for its many affordances and
technological advancements, we can still experience lost
connections, outages, low bandwidth, latency issues, dropped
audio, frozen video, distractions, and more. You have likely
experienced similar challenges in your own virtual training or
online adult education sessions. And if you have so far
miraculously escaped such an experience, just wait. It’s
coming.
As learners, facilitators, and producers, we work with
multiple virtual training platforms, varying connection
bandwidths, and a myriad of devices all converging
concurrently. The likelihood of something going wrong is
high. The focus of this chapter is how to help you troubleshoot
and recover when it does. So, let’s explore the next core virtual
trainer capability: agile troubleshooting.
THE BIG IDEA
Use the 3 Ms Method to mitigate risk, manage
the expected and unexpected, and help learners
(and yourself) keep moving forward.
Troubleshooting Also Means Managing
Expectations
It may seem like virtual training is a mixed bag. But once we
realize technical challenges are part of virtual training, we are
less disappointed when they occur. It’s all about managing
expectations. Not only are we less surprised, but more
importantly, we are quicker to adapt. The real lesson, of

course, is to learn to accept what is happening and then take
necessary action. This makes us less likely to react negatively,
which only makes a situation worse. By first accepting that
things can go wrong in the virtual space, it equips us to
respond more productively.
PRO TIP 66
Accept that things can and will go wrong with
technology; technical issues are part of virtual
training.
In one of my virtual training classes, I prepared learners for
an exercise to complete in small breakout groups. For this
session, my producer had graciously agreed to manage
breakouts when the time came. As she started to divide them,
some attendees were successfully placed, but others were not.
After she made three attempts to divide everyone into their
breakouts, it was still not working correctly. So, I sent her a
quick private chat that we would do the activity in a different
way instead. Ironically, the topic of this class was how to
conduct virtual training. For attendees to experience a
challenge like this in real life could be a great teaching
moment. As my producer regrouped everyone into the main
session, I said, “Well, we did that on purpose … so you could
experience what can happen in virtual training!” They
laughed, of course, knowing it wasn’t true. Humor is a great
way to diffuse tension. It also increases positive energy in any
space, including virtual space.
With everyone back from the breakouts that were not meant
to be, I had to be agile and decide how to proceed. Their
breakout assignment included a challenging scenario for them
to discuss and figure out how to resolve within their small
groups. Although small-group discussions allow for greater
individual participation and are preferable, I knew we had to
pivot. I also knew we could still complete the assignment as a
large group. So, that’s what we did.
With the group at-large, we discussed various solutions to
the scenario in their assignment. Some participants raised
virtual hands and came off mute to share, while others posted
ideas in chat. Through it all, my producer and I were able to

stay calm and even joke about it with learners. We did not
allow ourselves to get upset in the moment. It’s important to
keep a level head during class; you can always express any
needed emotional release after class. Later, of course, we
asked technical staff to investigate the incident further. Our
conduct during class not only demonstrated to attendees how
to pivot when technical issues emerge, but it turned into
something more memorable. Years from now, they may not
remember what we said that day, but they may remember what
we did. Sometimes participants learn more from what you do
than what you say.
PRO TIP 67
Use humor to diffuse tension, infuse positive
energy, and redirect learner attention.
It’s also important to remember that when you debrief with
your producer after class, never do it using the same training
session link right after, unless you’re using private chat.
Sometimes participants may be slow to exit and overhear your
discussion. End your original virtual training session first and
then reconnect separately with your producer to debrief, as
needed.
When technical challenges arise, we have a choice. We can
either choose to react negatively or look for opportunity. If we
look for opportunity, this shifts us into problem-solving mode.
For example, if a virtual tool is not working correctly for a
learning activity, ask yourself if there is a different tool you
could use instead. For instance, if a poll is not launching
correctly, you can read the question aloud and ask attendees to
post their answers (A, B, C, or D) in chat, or type the question
on a whiteboard and have them circle the appropriate letter
with annotation tools. When things go wrong in the virtual
platform, focus instead on what you can do, not on what you
can no longer do.
The 3 Ms Method
A personal method I created and have taught others to use is
the 3 Ms Method (Figure 9-1). It is a framework that has
helped me address the technical challenges that inevitably

happen. This three-pronged method offers strategies for
predicting and addressing issues before class day, when live
challenges emerge during training, and how to recover and
move forward afterward. The 3 Ms are:
1. Mitigate
2. Manage
3. Move forward
Figure 9-1. The 3 Ms Method for Troubleshooting
Overall, this method helps us circumvent a variety of virtual
training technical issues. The first M mitigates risk ahead of
time by reminding you to take preventive actions well before
virtual training day. The second M helps you manage both the
predictable and unpredictable when they arise during training.
The final M reminds you to let things go and expedite
everyone’s recovery—including your own—so the training
session can move forward productively. Let’s examine each
more closely.
Mitigate
Again, the first M in the 3 Ms Method is mitigate. Most of us
are familiar with Murphy’s Law. If things can go wrong, they
will. To increase our chances of smooth and successful
training, we mitigate risk by doing all we can to prevent or
reduce the risk of common technical issues blindsiding us in
the first place. Mitigation starts well before virtual class day,
and there are several strategies we can use.
Take Preventive Action
One of the best ways to mitigate is through preventive action.
This involves taking steps to alleviate risk for you and your
learners in advance. For example, it is important to send pre-
class communications to learners to welcome them, set
expectations, and include steps they can take now to ensure all
works well for them technically. This can be accomplished by

sending a welcome email or a welcome video. It is an
opportunity to also request learners check their connection and
their access to the technology to ensure a positive learning
experience. In the earlier days of virtual training, the platforms
we worked with often prompted participants to download
plug-ins, which took some time. Ensuring this was done before
class day made it less likely there would be hiccups at start
time. Thankfully, platforms have greatly improved. However,
in your preliminary communications, you should still ask
learners to test their connections, audio, speakers, and access
to the platform before class day. Many platforms provide ways
to test connections ahead of time. There are even sites and
apps you can visit to test your internet connection speed, such
as speedtest.net.
Other preventive actions include communicating the
expectation to log in five to 10 minutes early. This also
provides valuable time for extra troubleshooting. As a
facilitator, I always insist on connecting at least 30 minutes
ahead of time with my producers. This gives us time to check
audio, go over any last-minute arrangements, set up
whiteboards if they’re not completed already, pull up
materials, place a welcome message in chat, and so on. It can
be tempting for successive training programs that meet
multiple times to forgo the half-hour minimum setup time, but
I always advise this because surprises can still emerge.
One time I was tempted to log in only 15 minutes early
because it was another session in a program where we had
already met together as a class earlier in the week. Everyone
had successfully been able to connect, and all had gone well.
However, this turned out to be the day the producer
accidentally sent the training link for a different date in the
series, and to our great surprise, none of us were able to log in.
The producer scrambled to correct the link and resend it
quickly to all. After that, I reminded myself that I knew better.
Even if you think it should be easy to log in because you’ve
already worked with the same learners on the same platform
with the same producer earlier that week or the week before,
you still need to make time for last-minute troubleshooting just

in case. When things go wrong, that time buffer is essential for
resolving issues before learners join so you can start on time.
In another virtual training class, many learners were new to
the technology platform. Because it was a small class, I met
with them for scheduled, 10-minute tech checks the week
before to check their system’s compatibility with the platform.
These sessions proved to be invaluable because two of the
dozen or so participants discovered issues that we were then
able to resolve before training day. One learner was not able to
use his camera and had to enable it in settings on his device.
Another had a very poor audio connection from her location,
so I asked her to call in on the phone line instead, which
worked much better. This way, on class day, she knew to call
in for the audio and connected via internet for the visual
portion, and all worked smoothly. If we hadn’t troubleshooted
ahead of time, it would have been very frustrating for her and
everyone else and significantly delayed our start time.
When participants log in ahead of time for tech checks, this
also increases their comfort level with the platform, and
reduces their class-day anxiety (and mine). Above and beyond
resolving technical issues ahead of time, the extra bonus is that
they appreciate their facilitator spending individual time with
them. I noticed how it helped build our working relationship,
and some even spoke up more in class because they had
already talked with their facilitator and felt more comfortable.
Because we invested in mitigation strategies beforehand, we
enjoyed a smooth first-day kickoff to our virtual training
program.
Your perceived credibility and likability—whether we like it
or not—can also play a role in whether participants choose to
participate and listen. This is the power of relational building
in learning. Although 10-minute tech checks are not practical
for every class and topic, it may be appropriate based on
several variables, such as learners’ familiarity with the
technology, level of expertise with online learning, your
availability, and of course, class size. I usually use them if it’s
a robust virtual training program where we’ll meet several
times over several weeks and teach-backs or presentations are
part of their assignments.

Make a List of What Could Go Wrong
It’s also important to identify ready-made solutions to
common technical issues ahead of time. The best way to
mitigate technical challenges is to identify all the common
issues that could go wrong and then plan—or research if you
don’t know—ways you could address them. As e-learning
expert Bill Horton recommends, when you rehearse, write
down all the things you can think of that can go wrong on
index cards and then shuffle them. “Every five minutes during
a rehearsal, draw a card and pretend that the problem on the
card just occurred” (Horton 2006). This gives you the
opportunity to calmly practice and think through what you
could or should do, rather than waiting and hoping for the best
during a live session. The hoping for the best strategy can
certainly be tempting for some, but it is never best practice.
Strategic planning will not only provide you with solutions in
the moment, but give you the repetition needed to resolve
issues with confidence. Table 9-1 lists 10 common technical
issues I’ve encountered, actions to take to prevent them, and
how my producers and I have addressed them when they did
occur.
Table 9-1. Common Issues and How to Address Them
Common
Tech Issues
Preventive Actions
Before Class Day
How to Address
Cannot hear
audio or
cannot see
slides
Mitigate with pre-class
messaging (welcome video
or email) to test their
connection, speaker, mic,
and platform link well
beforehand.
Request they exit and rejoin
session to reset everything
(slides and audio). If audio
issues only, request they call
the phone option for audio
instead.
“Never
received” the
handouts or
participant
guide
Send handouts or
participant guides in the
very same invite message
that contained the link to
the session a week before
class and send another
reminder the day of
training.
If your platform allows,
upload the PDF of your
handouts or digital
participant guides for
learners to download.
Alternatively, you can post
the links in chat where they
can access them.
Lost internet
After going over netiquette
Have learners join via audio

connection
or lost power
guidelines on front end,
remind them what they can
do if they lose power. Have
mobile phone charged and
nearby. In case it happens
to you, print out your slides
and all materials, so you
could have your producer
share materials and you
could train via phone audio
if necessary.
from their mobile phones
and if the session is being
recorded, offer to send them
the recording later.
Session link
not working
In pre-communications,
strongly encourage
participants to log in five to
10 minutes early to allow
for extra troubleshooting if
needed. Send a reminder
link the day of training.
Request producer resend
the link or remind them of
the phone number they
could use to call in for the
audio portion.
Audio
distortions
with echoes
or feedback
In pre-class
communications,
encourage them to use an
external mic, headset, or
earbuds. Sometimes when
using a built-in mic, their
audio input can be picked
up through their speakers
and create a feedback
loop. Remind them of
netiquette guidelines
upfront.
Exit session and login to
reset. Producer or virtual
trainer can check the
participant panel to locate
the source of the active
audio, and then mute the
individual. Alternatively,
facilitator can mute
everyone at once, and
unmute them later after
reminding them to mute
themselves if they’re in a
noisy environment.
Hear other
people
talking in the
background
In pre-communication email
or video, encourage all to
find a quiet space to attend
class. Communicate
netiquette expectations
early in the session.
Correct the behavior as
soon as it begins, as this
can become distracting to all
participants. Politely remind
all to mute if they are in a
noisy environment.
Unable to
hear the
audio from
the recorded
video clip,
audio not
synced with
video, video
screen
frozen, or
Assign videos to be
watched before class day
as a pre-class assignment.
As you go over netiquette,
remind participants to close
all applications not needed
for class to conserve
bandwidth.
Stop sharing video. Enable
system audio before re-
sharing video for learners to
view. Or post the link in chat
for them to go off and view
on their own and request all
return in 10 minutes. If
learners are still unable to
view, offer to send them the
link to the video after class
for async viewing.

video won’t
play
Webcam not
working
In pre-class
communications, set the
expectation to “be camera
ready.” Also explain they
should test their webcam
with the respective platform
ahead of time.
Ensure that on their device
they have checked the
settings to allow webcam
use. Ensure their sliding
cover is open on a laptop
camera. Check to make
sure the desktop computer’s
camera isn’t open, so their
webcam can connect with
the virtual training platform.
Suggest they try exiting the
platform and rejoining to
reset.
Polls won’t
launch
Print or have all poll
questions and potential
options ready to go nearby
as plan B.
Ask the question verbally
and have learners chat in
their answers of A, B, C, or
D, or have backup slides of
poll questions open and
ready to go for a quick pivot.
Or use the whiteboard to
type each question and A,
B, C, and D, which learners
can circle with annotation
tools.
Breakouts
not working
Facilitator should rehearse
breakouts with a few
colleagues before class
day to iron out bugs. If
using Zoom, ensure you
have enabled breakouts. If
using Microsoft Teams,
ensure the person
managing breakouts is the
organizer who created the
session link (this
requirement may change in
the future). If you wish to
share whiteboards or PDFs
with all breakout groups,
practice this ahead of time.
Consider moving the
breakout activity to later in
the class and troubleshoot
during a break with your
producer before trying
again. Consider using paired
chats for discussion or
debriefs. Alternatively,
conduct the activity as one
large group.
I realize it is tempting for some learning professionals to
rationalize, “It’ll be OK” or “I’ll figure it out” the day of
virtual training. However, those who initially think that way
usually admit later to a change of heart. If you fly by the seat

of your pants and think, “I’ll just throw in a poll here” while
you’re training and you’ve not used them before on a specific
platform, you may discover your account is not enabled to use
forms for polls or you need a different role as the organizer or
host with more rights. As one of my learners succinctly put it,
“This type of venue really doesn’t work for winging it.” She’s
right!
A client of mine wanted to show a video through a virtual
platform training session and assumed it would work fine
because he could hear the audio through his own headset. He
assumed his learners could hear it too. However, we could not
hear the video because he had forgotten to enable the system
audio on that specific platform before screen sharing. These
are the common types of issues that are helpful to practice
ahead of time, so you can prevent them from happening during
your live event. One of the best ways to do this is to invite a
trusted colleague or your producer to test it with you ahead of
time. It takes two to test both the learner’s and the facilitator’s
experiences, because displays will look different depending on
your role.
Practice as You’ll Train
When I assign teach-backs or presentations to learners so they
can apply what they’ve learned in my virtual training
programs, I sometimes hold virtual office hours. These are
optional, scheduled drop-ins where learners can individually
practice their teach-back with me in the same platform we’ll
be using. They are encouraged to practice on their own as
well, if they have access to the platform, but it also gives them
the chance to play with the technology and feel more
comfortable.
One of my learners scheduled a time to practice with the
technology in one of these optional office hours. She
connected to the platform from her office, and we worked
through some minor fixes. At the end, she said she felt ready
to go for her teach-back the following week. When the day
came, she surprised me by logging in from a cabin up north
because her family decided to begin their holiday weekend
early. She was now facilitating from a laptop instead of her

desktop computer and had forgotten to bring her mouse. As a
result, she struggled to use the annotation toolbar because
using the trackpad instead of a mouse made clearing
annotations more challenging. Her bandwidth connection was
also sketchy, her room lighting through her live webcam no
longer optimal, and it was difficult to hear her audio at times.
However, the lesson learned that she shared with me later was
priceless: “I’ve learned to practice exactly how I’ll deliver it.”
One key mitigation strategy is to rehearse in the same
environment and with the same hardware and software you’ll
use for your live session, so you eliminate any new variables
and can find solutions to issues that emerge during practice.
In virtual training, we try to recreate an environment offline
where we can rehearse, make mistakes, and figure out ways to
address them before class day. Going through this explorative
preparation phase provides you with experience and
confidence so you are no longer worried about what could or
might happen.
PRO TIP 68
Rehearse with the same hardware and software,
at the same location, around the same time of day
as your live event to allow any surprises to emerge so
you can resolve them ahead of time.
Try Out All the Platform Features
As my father used to say about some things, learn it “forward
and backward, and inside and out.” We can also apply this
sage advice to learning a virtual training platform. When you
can confidently say you know what every button does, then
you know you’re ready to train on the platform. One of the
best ways to determine this is to schedule a technical rehearsal
with your producer. You can also familiarize yourself with the
platform by clicking every button, see if you can get stuck, and
then figure out how to get unstuck. This way you remember it
more. For example, on some platforms where it may not be as
intuitive to clear the annotations, play around with every
annotation tool so you know your way around the toolbar
backward and forward. Where is the eraser? Does it clear all

drawings or just the last one? Will the drawings stay on your
slides when you advance, or do they not carry over to the next
slides? When there are issues you cannot resolve or you need
specific answers, feel free to access online user discussions,
use the technical chat with your vendor, or reach out to
product technical support to get answers well before your live
session.
Learning what all the functionality on the platform does and
how to use it also boosts your confidence. Not only will you
speak with aplomb, but your learners will pick up on the
natural confidence and authority in your voice, which boosts
credibility. More important, when you deeply know the ins and
outs of your platform and what all the tools do, you are better
prepared to remedy a tricky situation. This way, you are
equipped to make quick decisions in the moment and move
more smoothly from a roadblock to an alternate route.
It’s also important to plan for troubleshooting when using
different virtual training platforms. More than a decade ago, a
colleague of mine was instructing a virtual class using a virtual
platform. The client provided a producer for the event and my
business partner was using the annotation tools with his slides.
On this event, he used some annotation tools to circle and
highlight where learners should focus. He then cleared
annotations and clicked to advance his slides. But the slides
would not advance. As you can imagine, this was a moment of
panic. In this platform, the facilitator needed to click an arrow
icon to regain mouse control after using the drawing tools and
then click once more on the slides before they would advance.
Rehearsing this ahead of time would have eliminated this
moment of panic and feeling stuck in the middle of a live
session.
Many common virtual training platforms like Adobe
Connect, Webex, GoToTraining, Blackboard Collaborate, and
Zoom share common features, just as most makes and models
of cars share similarities in features and functionality. I drove
many kinds of rental cars over the years when traveling across
the US to train clients in person. Even though the cruise
control or the headlights may have been in a slightly different
location on each rental car, I still had a mental model for

where I generally might find them. In the same way, although
there might be slight differences with platform tools and where
to find them, most platforms share general commonality in
their features and functionality. Because of your prior
knowledge from working on other platforms, you can
acclimate more easily to additional virtual training platforms.
Testing everything ahead of time can also spare you from
embarrassing moments. Once I used a live review game for
my virtual training session. I wanted to gamify our content
review and add a level of fun. I tested the system audio and
visuals with a colleague ahead of time to see if I could speak
over some music for the duration of the game. However, we
discovered in this test that I could not talk over the music in
the virtual training platform my customer used. Because the
music level needed to be loud, my spoken audio was soft.
Therefore, I decided to play a few opening seconds of the
music to set the tone for the live event, but then fade it out so
my learners and I could still talk and be heard by each other
during the review game.
So, mitigation is doing what we can before the actual event to
minimize the risk. And even though I mentioned things can go
wrong, it doesn’t always mean they will. Once I was
contracted as a trainer to run four virtual training sessions on
the same topic in a one-week period for a large company. I did
not have a producer to assist me back then, so it was much
more stressful to realize it was all resting on my shoulders. I
worked repeatedly with my client contact, and we had multiple
technical rehearsals and abbreviated run-throughs. As we met
for tech rehearsals in the weeks leading up to the live events,
we encountered several technical issues. But because we
discovered these issues early, we were able to work through
them all beforehand. What is so memorable about this for me
is that when it came time for the live virtual sessions,
everything worked perfectly! All four virtual training sessions
went smoothly and we didn’t experience any issues. So, it is
possible. Again, I attribute this to the work we’d done ahead of
time and the mitigation efforts that paved the way for these
successful live events.

PRO TIP 69
Know your technical platform better than the back
of your hand.
Manage
The second M in the 3 Ms Method is manage. This addresses
what to do when both predictable and unpredictable challenges
occur. 
Predictable 
issues 
require 
flexibility, 
while
unpredictable issues require agility. We will explore both and
identify prescriptive tips to help you be flexible and agile. But
there is one tip that applies to both the expected and
unexpected technical challenges that occur, and that is to keep
backstage items backstage.
For example, if you lost your printout of your slides, or your
new microphone won’t work even though you previously
tested it, or you accidentally just spilled your water glass all
over your notes, or your cat just threw up in your home office,
or there’s a huge spider crawling up your wall, or your
computer almost launched a big update, learners don’t need to
know these things.
Many of these treasured memories have happened to me,
and I’m sure many of you have your own thrilling stories to
share. Whatever it is, your customers (who are your learners)
don’t need to know all these behind-the-scenes details. It can
distract them from where they should be focused, which is on
what they’re learning. Once when I was teaching a virtual
training class, I must have said something that sounded close
to the name Siri. Suddenly my mobile phone started talking
aloud. I was using a USB external mic for that class, so I knew
learners could probably hear my phone talking. Because I was
also speaking at the time, I didn’t have the luxury of turning
Siri off in settings, so I threw my phone into a desk drawer
quickly and closed it while I continued to talk. As soon as I
gave my learners the opportunity to work on something, I
muted myself, opened the drawer and turned off my phone.
Later on the recording, I could hear a muffled voice in the
background but there was no need to share that with learners.
It would have been a distraction. Now when I have my phone

nearby for training, I always turn Siri off. Regardless of what
you might experience, carry on professionally, and keep
backstage items backstage to ensure learners stay focused and
have an overall positive experience.
The exception to this, of course, is if you can tie what just
happened to the topic at hand, and on the fly. For example, if
you accidentally spilled water over your notes right before
class began and your training topic was emotional intelligence
(EQ), you could share what happened as an illustrative story
later in the training session. For example, it might sound
something like, “Let’s talk next about how we can apply this
to our professional lives. You know when right before our
training began today, I accidentally spilled water all over my
notes.” You could then go on to share how you had to dig deep
to manage your emotions: You were immediately flooded with
frustration and anger. Then you had to remind yourself to
reframe the situation with compassion toward yourself because
accidents are a part of life. This helped you calm down and
even laugh about it later. By reframing, you were able to avoid
carrying anger and negative energy into the training session. In
this example, the vulnerability you demonstrate by sharing this
can even inspire learners to open up and share EQ stories of
their own. So, if you can tie what just happened to your topic
at hand, this is the exception.
Another way to keep items backstage is to share things or
discuss what you’re observing through the back channel via
private chat with your producer. For example, my producers
always ask me in private chat if I’m ready to go before they
kick off a session. Sometimes, they’ll remind me that we’re
getting close to the end, or I’ll share an issue that came up and
they’ll let me know if it’s resolved. All of this is done through
private chat via the platform. Backstage items and backstage
communication don’t always need to be heard or seen by the
customer. Instead, we ensure participants’ experiences are
positive, productive, and professional.
PRO TIP 70
Keep backstage items backstage.
Managing the Predictable

The good news is that many of the things that can go wrong in
a live session are predictable. Referencing the premade list of
potential things that could go wrong from your mitigation
efforts (plan B, C and sometimes D) can save the day. These
are the issues that most commonly occur. By going through the
steps in the mitigation phase, you’ll already determine the
things you could do, and your knowledge and pre-work will
help you manage them live in the moment. For example, slides
may not advance, learners may not hear audio, or you may
think you’re sharing and advancing slides when learners can’t
see them. Have your list nearby during live virtual training
events so you are ready with a solution to try.
PRO TIP 71
Over-prepare and be ready with multiple solutions
for the most common technical issues so you can
be agile and creatively problem solve as challenges
arise.
Know, too, that multiple solutions exist in any given
moment for any given problem. Past experience and remaining
calm can help you see them. If you are accidentally muted,
your producer or learners will let you know, and you’ll just
summarize what you said when you were on mute. Or if
someone else is sharing by the time you figure it out, you can
type in the chat what you shared while you were muted. Most
importantly, if you remain calm, alert, and attentive, you will
be better able to think of solutions.
When major difficulties happen and you need more time to
troubleshoot, you can send people to take a brief refresher or
stand-up break. I like to remind them to use this time to “get a
beverage, walk around your environment, take a bio break,
spend some time in mindful stillness, or whatever they need to
refresh and come back to the virtual space.” I try to encourage
time away from screens during these breaks, such as avoiding
checking email. Blood flow to the brain increases just by
standing and moving. So, definitely remind learners to stand
up and move around during all breaks if possible. Then, while
they’re on break, you can work on more extensive
troubleshooting. This helps you remain calm knowing

everyone is not waiting for you to resolve an issue. If you train
without a producer, learners may have to wait for you to
complete certain tasks. So, it is a best practice to partner with a
producer if you can.
PRO TIP 72
If you need extra time to troubleshoot, give
everyone a longer refresh break.
Once, when I was presenting to a remote client through a
virtual training platform, I did not realize my internet
connection started going in and out and my audio was getting
muffled, but my producer came off mute and let me know.
This also let learners know it was being brought to my
attention, because they were experiencing difficulties hearing
me too. I asked my producer to send them on a short break
while I left the platform and logged back in to reset
everything.
I also like to have an independent, short assignment ready to
give to learners at any time just in case we need more
troubleshooting time. I sometimes share this with my
producers ahead of time. This way, if my connection goes
down, my producer could assign the short work assignment,
which always relates to the topic we’re learning about that day
and keep things moving. This gives learners something to do,
allowing them to reflect on the topic through an assignment.
More important, you can troubleshoot and partner with your
producer while learners are working on their assignment.
PRO TIP 73
If you encounter a complex technical issue, give
learners something to do by assigning a pre-
made, topic-relevant assignment to work on while you
troubleshoot. Share this assignment with your
producer ahead of time, so they can use it too, in case
you lose connection.
Managing the Unpredictable
In addition to managing the predictable, one intermediate skill
for virtual facilitators is being able to manage the unexpected.
According to a research study of the skills synchronous

facilitators need to support virtual learners, “developing
critical thinking skills” and being able to “manage unexpected
issues calmly and efficiently with little disruption to the class”
were identified as necessary advanced skills (Phelps and
Vlachopoulos 2020).
We described earlier that predictable, common issues can be
addressed with flexibility, and ideally, by working in tandem
with a producer. However, when the unpredictable comes
along—and there will be surprises—these are managed with
agility. Agility is being able to deviate from the plan swiftly
when the unexpected happens. In addition to agility, we need
to maintain poise and professionalism. According to virtual
training expert Jennifer Hofmann (2004), “Lots of last-minute,
unanticipated problems can occur when working remotely via
web technology. Synchronous trainers must be able to
maintain the course flow and manage high-stress situations
with grace.”
One of my clients in her teach-back suddenly couldn’t find
her chat, as she informed me later. I watched her face on
camera, noticed the pregnant pause, and could tell she was
panicking inside. But outwardly, she said very calmly, “Great,
thank you for those responses. Let’s move on now.” When we
had the opportunity to debrief privately afterward, she said, “I
couldn’t find my chat panel. It was open and then it went
away.” This can happen to the best of us. You can sometimes
use alt/tab to find all the open screens and this can be a way to
find the chat pane again if it is undocked. Sometimes the chat
function can be found in different locations dependending on
whether you are a participant or a host. Of course, if you have
a producer, you can task them to assist with reading or
summarizing responses if needed. And if you have a seasoned
producer, you can let them know via private chat and they can
manage the chat, or you could avoid using chat until after the
next break, which you can use to relocate what you need.
The good that comes from successfully managing the
unpredictable is that after you’ve experienced so much that
can go wrong and resolved or figured out ways to keep
moving, it no longer has a grip on you. You stop being afraid
of what could happen or what could go wrong, because you’ve

already experienced so many things that have gone wrong in
the past and learned that the world didn’t end. This experience
then fills you with the quiet confidence of knowing that
whatever comes your way, your producer or you will likely be
able to find something workable. Of course, there will be a
few times when you may not be able to fix something, so you
instead have to minimize the disruption as best you can.
Another time I was scheduled to train with a co-facilitator
many years ago on an earlier web conferencing platform. We
thought we were being proactive by logging in an hour early,
because that was the earliest we could access the link. We
tested everything, including all our tools, uploaded our
materials, and checked our connections before the training
class began. Then we closed the session, because we were so
early that we still had quite a bit of time to grab a drink and
take care of some other work-related items. However, back
then on this particular platform, the session link could only be
used once (drum roll, please), but we didn’t know that yet. So,
when the time came for us to log back in, the link was closed
and we were all locked out, including our learners! Naturally
we were horrified, and of course, had to scramble to create a
new session link we could email to everyone asking them to
please use the new link to join the session instead. But life
went on and it was a lesson learned.
Growth comes from making mistakes because mistakes are
how we learn. One of the best troubleshooters I know is from
Germany. He has experienced more technical issues than you
could ever imagine in a lifetime. But this is exactly what
makes him so skilled as a troubleshooter. It’s because he has
been exposed to so many technical issues and problems, and
has successfully worked through them, that he is a true expert
who demonstrates mastery solving technical problems. So, the
silver lining to experiencing technical issues during virtual
training is that you are building your troubleshooting expertise
and learning from each lesson. This is how skill is built—one
technical issue at a time.
Partner With a Producer

Partnering with a producer is one of the best ways to manage
both the predictable and unpredictable. It is so effective
because there are too many tasks to manage concurrently when
we teach live online. When you add technology to the mix,
many things can go wrong and there are more tasks and jobs to
complete.
The physical body provides a helpful metaphor here.
Several jobs must be done inside the physical body—too many
for just one organ to do alone. So, each organ has a job—the
liver, the stomach, the bladder, the spleen. In virtual training,
there are also too many jobs for one person to manage
smoothly. You can accomplish more when you partner with a
producer to manage the technical side, while you focus on
facilitating and connecting with learners. One of my clients
said it best, “I wish I could just teach and not have to worry
about the technology.” We are so grateful for producers and
their partnership in live online learning to help us do this more
effectively.
PRO TIP 74
Partner with a producer to manage the event so
you can focus on facilitating more effectively.
Back in the early 2000s, I was preparing to deliver my local
ATD chapter’s first ever virtual program using web
conferencing tools. Naturally, the organizers were a bit
nervous because they had only held in-person events up to that
point. At the time, the field was so new that the term producer
in the context of virtual training was nonexistent. I knew there
was a lot to manage while delivering it myself from a remote
training room. We also had a full roster of attendees. So, I
asked my business partner if he would join me in person from
where I was connecting remotely to help watch the chat in
case I missed anything important, assist with technical issues,
and of course, provide moral support. This was the early
makings of a producer role.
That said, you might be thinking that adding another
resource to your training event is not feasible, or your manager
would never approve, or you are a training department of one.
But there is still creative sourcing you can do. You may need

to do a bit more persuading to make your case for the
improved benefit or find a colleague in another department
who is technically savvy, but it can be done.
You can also work with your producer ahead of time to
agree on shared responsibilities and delegate tasks like
technical troubleshooting. When training customers virtually
using Adobe Connect at SkillPath, our producers set up a
separate chat pod for technical issues and another chat pod for
training content discussion. At the beginning of the training,
producers let participants know which chat pod was for what
and both were always visible to learners. This way, the
producer managed technical issues in the technical chat, and as
facilitator, I monitored posts related to the training topic in
content chat. Sometimes the wisdom of the group can also
prove to be an asset. Your learners will help each other in the
chat and answer some of their questions. When one facilitator
was attempting to show a video and no one could hear the
audio, a learner in the audience said, “I know how to fix that,”
and they were able to resolve the issue and move on.
As another alternative, you might consider a producer who
can at least assist when attendees first log in. In her book
Producing Virtual Training, Meetings, and Webinars, Kassy
LaBorie (2021) identifies three types of producers: technical
producers, facilitative producers, and start-time producers.
According to her, a start-time producer assists in the
beginning. They do not stay with the trainer for the entire
session, although they can remain available. For example,
when one of my producers at SkillPath was managing multiple
sessions in a day, she would log in with me 30 minutes before
the session began, stay on until everyone had joined, and once
everything was working well, left to produce other sessions.
She also let me know how to privately get a hold of her if I
required assistance after she left. LaBorie recommends having
start-time producers stay on for the first 15 minutes because
this is when most technical issues occur.
When another professional is paired with the facilitator and
is responsible for owning the technical responsibilities, this
really frees you to focus on providing effective instruction.
There are just so many technical and logistical things to

address otherwise. Two heads are always better than one, and
the amount of stress relief and nonverbal support it provides is
worth it, every time.
Move Forward
The final M in the 3 Ms Method is move forward. Just because
we resolved or could not resolve something, we still need to
move forward as productively as we can for the benefit of the
class. This ties into resilience, which is our ability to come
back from hardship, difficulty, and challenge without
remaining stuck in what just happened. The quicker we
bounce back, the more resilient we are. What can help you
recover faster, of course, is if you know what to do.
When we encounter challenges or troubles during virtual
training, we need to be agile, creative, and think on our feet to
find a resolution. Afterward, this might leave you reeling or
grieving what just happened. But the quicker we can place
what happened behind us, the more likely we are to move
forward in a positive way. In 2021, Team USA Olympian
gymnast Jade Carey turned a disappointing performance one
day into an Olympic gold-winning performance the next. The
previous day, she missed the podium after a surprising stumble
in the vault final. She told NBC’s TODAY Show host Hoda
Kotb that after her performance on the vault, “I needed to put
it behind me.” This enabled her to channel a fresh perspective
into her floor exercise final to take home gold (Kotb 2021).
Recovery is about resetting yourself emotionally and
mentally after frustrating events, disappointments, or even
technical glitches. It means letting go of what just happened.
Unquestionably, not allowing a recent disaster to throw you off
kilter can be challenging. A starting point is becoming very
aware of what your thoughts are telling you. Thoughts can
trigger our emotions like fear, frustration, anger, or sadness,
resulting in physiological responses in our bodies. However,
thoughts are also just thoughts. They are neutral. We don’t
have to believe them. We don’t have to act on them. We can
allow them to just pass by.

Sometimes after a more challenging disruption, I send
everyone on a break, ensure I am muted, and imagine while
exhaling that I am breathing out negative energy. You can even
visualize a color for it (red light). Then, on the inhale, I
imagine breathing in positive energy (white light). Remember,
negative energy (even frustration) can poison the energy of
your training session. As the facilitator, you are still an
influential leader. What you say, feel, and do sets the trajectory
for what learners may say, feel, and do. Releasing negative
energy helps you move into a more positive state that helps
learners follow as well. You can, of course, simply apologize
for any inconvenience. And if we do not make a big deal of it,
learners won’t either. So, if something goes wrong, apologize,
correct it, and move on. Do not belabor it; this just keeps the
problem alive, and sometimes can become what learners
remember most and all they talk about on evaluations.
Another time, I was teaching for the first time on a new
virtual training platform. It was also my first time working
with this producer, and he was gracious to showed me all the
tools and functionality when we met for a tech rehearsal
before class day. During the live session, however, when it
came time to look at learners’ responses to polling questions,
for the life of me, I could not find the poll results. I quickly
scanned the panels on both my monitors and still could not
find it. In that split second, I made the decision to not draw
attention to this fact. What I heard come out of my mouth—
even though I had no idea how they had all voted—was “Well,
it looks like we were all over the board on that one. Thanks for
voting everyone.” This was certainly a way to call the activity
to a close, keep backstage items backstage, and keep things
moving, but I missed the opportunity to highlight the real
results because I couldn’t find them. As the popular adage
claims, hindsight is always 20/20. Looking back, it would
have been better if I asked my producer to come off mute and
summarize the polling results for us. Regardless, I kept things
moving without disruption or distraction, but afterward made a
point to learn from what happened.
Recovery in the world of virtual training is about adapting
and, yes, growth. Of course, we do everything we can before

the point of live instruction to practice the technology, to
rehearse, and to know the platform as best we can. What is in
our control is how we prepare. We mitigate, manage, and
move forward as we connect with others across time and space
regardless of what interruption or glitch may occur.
Summary
As one of my clients beautifully summarized earlier, “I see
that the virtual environment is not really a space where I can
wing it.” The added complexity of technology and the wide
array of interdependencies only invite greater opportunity for
challenge. To guide you through, use the 3 Ms Method. This
means you minimize the risk of things going wrong by taking
several steps before class day. Then, when common,
predictable things go wrong, you follow ready-made solutions
identified beforehand. If unpredictable things happen, you do
your best to resolve them in the moment and ask, “What can I
do instead? How can I pivot? What is another way I can
accomplish this learning activity?” There are almost always
things you can do. Then, once you’ve hopefully resolved any
issue, put it behind you. Simply apologize and move on. Do
not continue to bring it up, resurrect or mention the issue again
at the end, or apologize repeatedly to taint learners’ overall
experience.
You might be wondering how the true story at the beginning
of this chapter concluded. Since the virtual trainer had lost his
internet connection and appeared unable to reestablish it, the
producer initially waited and then tried to move through the
beginning slides herself. She filled in for him by explaining
and sharing what she could about the topic, while he continued
to try to reconnect. When efforts to reconnect failed, he called
in to the session through a separate audio line and asked the
producer to advance his slides even though he couldn’t see
them. This way, he was able to explain them via phone audio.
The producer also administered the polls and shared the results
aloud so he could hear them. This is why having a printout of
your slides nearby can be helpful. When the facilitator asked
learners to comment in chat, the producer summarized what
she was seeing and read a few aloud so he could hear them as

well. Eventually, learners were given an extended break, and
during this time, the trainer was at last able to fully reconnect
and return to facilitate the remainder of the session.
Troubleshooting and recovery do not have to be scary. It is
the disservice, as Marshall McLuhan said, that comes with the
service of technology. Once we realize this, we accept both the
convenience and inconvenience of digital technology. We help
ourselves and our learners by mitigating what we can ahead of
time, managing through the technical difficulties in tandem
with producers, and leading the entire class forward.
As you grow in your agile troubleshooting capability, you
will become more skilled at taking preventive action,
managing expectations, and pivoting quickly. Because even in
the most challenging of circumstances—when we or our
producers are not able to fix something—we can always move
to plan B, C, or D and keep moving forward.
In addition to skillfully resolving technical issues, it’s also
important to develop evaluation skills so you can determine
whether your virtual training has met its goals. In the next
chapter, we’ll look at the importance of measuring value and
how to evaluate the impact of your virtual training programs.
Pro Tips for Practicing your Agile
Troubleshooting Skills
TIP
66
Accept that things can and will go wrong with technology;
technical issues are part of virtual training.
TIP
67
Use humor to diffuse tension, infuse positive energy, and
redirect learner attention.
TIP
68
Rehearse with the same hardware and software, at the same
location, around the same time of day as your live event to
allow any surprises to emerge so you can resolve them ahead
of time.
TIP
Know your technical platform better than the back of your

69
hand.
TIP
70
Keep backstage items backstage.
TIP
71
Over-prepare and be ready with multiple solutions for the most
common technical issues so you can be agile and creatively
problem solve as challenges arise.
TIP
72
If you need extra time to troubleshoot, give everyone a longer
refresh break.
TIP
73
If you encounter a complex technical issue, give learners
something to do by assigning a pre-made, topic-relevant
assignment to work on while you troubleshoot. Share this
assignment with your producer ahead of time, so they can use
it too, in case you lose connection.
TIP
74
Partner with a producer to manage the event so you can focus
on facilitating more effectively.

“Go to where the puck is going, not where it has been.”
—Walter Gretzky, father of Canadian hockey star Wayne
Gretzky

Evaluating and Innovating in
the Virtual Space
It feels like a world ago. As a young teen, my high school
driving instructor left our class speechless when he asked a
single question: “Where should your focus be when you’re
driving?” Our class eventually cobbled together an answer,
which sounded something like “Where you are on the road?”
“No,” was his response.
We were stunned, and I’ll never forget his explanation.
“Your focus shouldn’t be where you are … but where you’re
going to be.” Ah, a trick question! We certainly wanted to take
issue with this, but as 16-year-olds, we intuitively knew better
than to argue with the only in-room, adult authority on the
subject.
If we apply the point of this story and the opening quotation
to a broader context, we see that technology—and specifically,
virtual training—is also a moving target. As the title of this
chapter suggests, evaluation and innovation are dual points of
focus for this movement. First, with evaluation, there is a need
to focus on what virtual participants are going to do with what
they’ve learned. You don’t want to focus on where you are
exclusively (participants’ satisfaction with the training), but
rather where you’re going to be (learners’ workplace
application and the impact to the organization). Whether or not
participants liked the virtual training—although this plays into
motivation—is not the end-all be-all.
Second, with innovation, you want to be aware of new
developments in the virtual training industry and stay abreast
of current trends. New innovations can also inspire your own

experimentation for the betterment of live online learning. You
want to be careful not to limit your vision to only where you
currently are, but also keep an eye on future developments in
the field, especially as the pace of technological change
accelerates. From the late 1990s through 2019, many web
conferencing platforms entered and exited the market. The
platforms that remained tended to stay relatively similar with a
few exceptions. But the global, explosive expansion of the use
of virtual training platforms during the COVID-19 pandemic
prompted accelerated improvements, sometimes even weekly.
Evaluation and innovation go hand in hand. Each informs
the other. For example, we evaluate something to identify what
is and isn’t working. Innovation then often emerges when
something isn’t working and there is a problem to solve.
Evaluation is one of the more challenging tasks we do as
learning and development practitioners. And, if we are honest,
evaluation may be one of those things that we tend not to
focus on or do as often as we should. After all, you may
consider yourself a professional designer or trainer, not a
professional evaluator. But our training solutions should
always evaluate the effectiveness of what we do. We have a
vested responsibility to identify—or at least delegate partners
to identify—whether our virtual training programs are having
an impact, large or small. Otherwise, how do we know
whether we are hitting or missing the mark?
Evaluation also helps reduce uncertainty. Any data you
collect helps you make decisions about what and where to
improve, so we must measure the right things. In some
organizations, attendance is the only metric passed on to
executives regarding training. Although this is certainly one
metric, it does not measure whether participants learned and
applied what they learned or whether that had an impact on the
organization. We need to be prepared to have data at the ready
to show whether training is making a difference.
As previously established in this book, online learning is
here to stay. Organizations around the globe are investing
more learning and development resources in it. Executives
also have higher expectations for L&D. LinkedIn Learning’s
2021 Workplace Learning Report surveyed more than 5,000

people (which included learning professionals, managers, and
learners) from 27 countries. Accordingly, L&D professionals
said they expected their budgets to increase and predict a
continued shift away from ILT to online learning. “In early
2020, 38 percent of L&D pros expected to spend less on ILT
and 57 percent expected to spend more on online learning.
Today, those numbers are significantly higher: 73 percent of
L&D pros expect to spend less on ILT and 79 percent expect
to spend more on online learning” (Van Nuys 2021). The
increasing allocation of additional resources for online
learning is telling. We need to be evaluating the virtual
training programs we create from these increased resources to
demonstrate the resulting value.
In this chapter, we explore the final capability, evaluating
impact. We will identify a virtual training approach for your
consideration, highlight helpful evaluation frameworks, and
offer examples for evaluating your virtual training. The second
half of this chapter addresses innovation—because if
something isn’t working, we need to try something different.
We should always be evaluating, because it shows us whether
we’re meeting our goals. And we should always be innovating
so we can continuously improve. Both help us improve and
both can take us to the next level.
THE BIG IDEA
To continually improve, evaluate the
effectiveness of your virtual training programs
and push past the limits of what you’ve previously
done to discover what could still be.
Evaluating Virtual Training
Clayton Christensen famously coined the Jobs to Be Done
(JTBD) Theory. This theory stems from one central question,
“What is the job a person is hiring a product to do?”
(Christensen et al. 2016). This succinct, direct question can be
useful for learning and development to ask. When virtual
training—or training in general—is determined to be the best
solution, you can use an adapted version of JTBD. For

example, at the outset of a project, consider asking
stakeholders, “What is the job you are hiring virtual training to
do?” This question single-handedly drives to the heart of the
workplace performance change needed. What is the job? How
they answer can translate into your performance objectives for
the course. From there, you can determine any knowledge or
learning objectives to support the doing. It starts with a front-
end analysis question like, “What should employees be able to
do after completing this virtual training program?” In addition
to asking stakeholders this question up front, you can also ask
a few learners who will be in the training. As we explored in
chapter 2, not only can you gather perspectives from a few
sample learners early on for feedforward advice on designs,
but you can also gather their perspective even earlier regarding
the question, “What is the job you are hiring this virtual
training program to do for you?” Learner responses are always
insightful—because it’s a different perspective—and this can
guide your design trajectory.
Early on, when you first meet with stakeholders, internal
customers, or external clients to conduct a front-end analysis,
you ask questions to identify the workplace problem that needs
to be solved. Yet often the “problem” may not be the real
issue. If you dig a bit deeper, you’ll discover that beneath the
surface, there is sometimes a causal, underlying core problem.
Training is often identified too quickly as a solution when it
may not be the most appropriate, depending on what the core
problem is. Let’s say, for example, a customer service team
receives excellent ratings from customers, except for one staff
person. Rather than deliver customer service training to the
entire team “because it would be good for everyone any way,”
a more targeted strategy would be to offer customer-service
coaching to the one employee who may not even realize their
service skills are sub-par. In other workplace situations, all that
may be needed is a type of workflow learning or performance
support, like a job aid to support a procedural task or to
illustrate how to use a system in the flow of work.
This book includes many recommendations from evidence-
based practice and learning-science research. Pause and
consider for a moment what science is at its essence. With

science, we observe, take notes, and test our ideas to see if
they hold weight by collecting data. We are empirical. If we
look at it through this filter, this can also inform our definition
of evaluation. We, too, want to observe the effects of the
virtual training programs we create, so we can improve them
and know whether they were effective. To be more rigorous
about it, we can take measurements. These methods help us
determine the overall impact of the virtual training programs
we design and deliver.
A talented evaluator once taught me to always begin by
asking an internal customer interested in evaluation, “What do
you want to measure?” We can usually measure anything, but
it’s important to measure the right things. Our evaluations
should be twofold: to assess the effectiveness of the program
from the learners’ perspective based on their experience, as
discussed in chapter 2, and to evaluate it from the
stakeholders’ perspective in terms of the learner’s ability to
apply it to their jobs and have a larger impact on the
organization.
So, in virtual training, where do we begin? We begin with
the knowledge, learning, or performance objectives, which
come from the front-end analysis you conduct with the internal
customer, business area, or external client. Once the objectives
are identified, it is at this early juncture that you want to create
an evaluation plan for the training program. Consider the
following elements as you develop your evaluation plan:
• What will you evaluate (up to what level)?
• Who will evaluate it?
• How often and when will you evaluate?
• What will you do with the evaluation data once it’s
available?
• With whom will the evaluation data be shared and why?
When you are considering what to do with the data, one of
the best places to start is with the end in mind. Clarify how the
data will be used to make decisions. Know what you’re going
to do with it before you collect it. According to Douglas

Hubbard (2010) in How to Measure Anything, the goal is to
reduce uncertainty. Any data you collect can help reduce the
uncertainty about something and therefore inform future
decisions about it.
For example, let’s say you delivered a virtual training
program to customer service staff on how to efficiently resolve
customer issues via phone and reduce wait times. If your
objectives are to give staff statement prompts they can use to
quickly resolve an issue and close a call with courteous, polite
service, you should convert these objectives to metrics you
want to evaluate later (such as wait times, call length, and
customer satisfaction). Then determine how you might collect
this data. For example, to measure impact, you’ll want to look
at customer service surveys as well as wait time data to
determine if callers are spending less time in the queue waiting
for a representative. Lastly, determine with whom this data
will be shared and how it can inform decision makers. This
plan is determined on the front-end right after you identify
learning objectives.
PRO TIP 75
Create an evaluation plan in the design phase of
your project, and evaluate learning based on the
knowledge and performance objectives identified at the
outset.
How Do You Evaluate?
Another way to think about evaluation is to look at it from the
perspectives of the different audiences vested and determine
who needs to know what. For example, when you train, you
have multiple audience groupings who may be interested in
the feedback: the learners, their managers, a design team,
stakeholders, and your training delivery team (such as a
producer or facilitator). The delivery team will want to know if
learners found the virtual training valuable. Their managers
should see the virtual training’s worth because of their
investment away from functional work. Executive leadership
should see the overall impact to the organization, and in some
cases, the ROI, especially for enterprise-wide virtual training

programs or highly visible ones. Ideally, customers should
experience the ripple impact as well. Be sure to capture your
own perspective as a virtual trainer, and your producer’s as
well. Your perspective is also insightful. How did it go for
you? Did it feel like you were connecting? Were people
engaged?
Then, once you know who your target audience is for your
evaluation data, you need to collect it. There are several ways
to measure the effectiveness of virtual training programs.
Some include direct observation, retention or turnover metrics,
quality metrics, culture or employee satisfaction surveys,
knowledge checks, skill assessments, interviews, key
performance indicators, focus groups, learning management
system test reporting, or competency assessments. Interviews,
for example, are an opportunity to more deeply examine why
learners may or may not have applied what was taught in
virtual training to their jobs. You can use knowledge checks
and assignments that gauge where people are and where
they’re struggling as pre-tests ahead of virtual training to
ensure they’re the right fit. After the training, you can conduct
performance 
evaluations 
using 
rubrics 
to 
evaluate
demonstrated competencies or abilities covered in virtual
training. For example, once a learner demonstrates proficiency
in competency-based virtual training, they then receive credit
for course completion or competencies attained.
PRO TIP 76
Determine which levels of evaluation are most
important to your customers, employees, their
managers, and stakeholders to measure the
effectiveness of your virtual training programs.
Collect Early Feedforward Advice: Evaluate As
You Go
A type of evaluation that you can conduct during the design
and prototyping phase of creating virtual training is called
feedforward or formative assessment. This is what Michael
Allen (2012) advocates in his Successive Approximations
Model, leveraging continuous rapid prototyping in an iterative

process through the creation and design of the training
program. This early feedforward can be invaluable because
input and feedback are collected on the initial program
designs.
You can invite a few end recipients or staff who are in the
target audience to be part of the design team. This way, you
can run design ideas by them as you go. Who better to get
feedback from than the ultimate end user? The reason this
information is collected at the front end is because it saves
time in the initial stages of design and allows for rapid
prototyping and iteration. If feedback is collected at the
backend, it’s too late to adjust and too much time and
resources have already been invested.
In contrast with formative assessment (which is part of the
design process), summative evaluation comes at the end when
you collect feedback from those who experienced and attended
the virtual training. This is where learners might click a link to
an online evaluation in the chat or receive an email that takes
them to an online survey where they can evaluate the class.
Evaluation Frameworks to Guide You
There are a variety of influential frameworks for evaluation
and measurement in the field of learning and development.
Some include Katzell’s Hierarchy of Steps, the Kirkpatrick
Model’s four levels of evaluation, and the ROI Institute’s ROI
Methodology, which also includes a process model. Let’s
review each and then connect back to virtual training.
Katzell’s 4 Steps to Evaluating Training
In the early 1950s, prominent industrial-organizational
psychologist Raymond Katzell originated the concept of a
hierarchy of steps to evaluate training programs. This
organizing structure laid a foundation for those who would
later be inspired by his work. Step one identifies how “trainees
feel” about the training. Step two identifies whether they
learned through “knowledge and understanding.” Step three
identifies how much there were “on-the-job behavior changes”
when they returned to their work. And step four looks at “any

ripple effects” from these behavior changes like absenteeism
or production (Kirkpatrick 1956; Smith 2008).
The Kirkpatrick Model
A model of measurement widely adopted across the talent
development industry is the Kirkpatrick model. In 1959 and
1960, Donald L. Kirkpatrick first published articles based on
his PhD dissertation about training evaluation in the ASTD
Journal. The four words he identified in that article later
became known worldwide as the four levels of evaluation:
reaction, learning, behavior, and results (Kirkpatrick 1996).
According to the New World Kirkpatrick Model from the
Kirkpatrick Partners (2021), the following are updated
definitions of the original four levels:
• Level 1: Reaction evaluates “the degree to which
participants find the training favorable, engaging, and
relevant to their jobs.”
• Level 2: Learning evaluates “the degree to which
participants acquire the intended knowledge, skills,
attitude, confidence, and commitment based on their
participation in the training.”
• Level 3: Behavior evaluates “the degree to which
participants apply what they learned during training when
they are back on the job.”
• Level 4: Results evaluates “the degree to which targeted
outcomes occur as a result of the training and the support
and accountability package.”
The ROI Process Model
Jack J. Phillips developed the ROI Methodology, which is a
systematic approach to help organizations evaluate and
improve programs and projects for greater impact. Just as
chapter 2 discussed the influential role of design thinking, the
ROI Methodology “uses design thinking principles to design
for results needed” (Phillips, Phillips, and Ray 2020). This
methodology helps organizations collect both qualitative and
quantitative data to measure success for training programs like

virtual training along a chain of impact from initial planning to
requesting more funding. It also includes techniques to help
isolate the effects of training programs for more credible data.
In 1992, Jack Phillips founded the ROI Institute, which works
with network partners in more than 70 countries around the
world. Jack and Patti Phillips at the ROI Institute have also
identified an ROI Process Model. This five-level model
acknowledges an initial level for input and adds a fifth level
for ROI, or return on investment:
• Level 0: Input
• Level 1: Reaction
• Level 2: Learning
• Level 3: Application
• Level 4: Impact
• Level 5: ROI
Level 0: Input
The input level acknowledges measures such as the number of
people involved, their input of time into the process, types and
number of programs, the scope, and costs. “Input is important
but doesn’t speak to the outcomes or results” (Phillips,
Phillips, and Ray 2020).
Level 1: Reaction
The first level then is learner reaction. How are participants
seeing the value in what you do? Is it relevant to them? Is it
important to them? Would they recommend it to others? This
reaction data from learners can be collected through surveys or
evaluations that learners complete throughout the training in
short spurts or near the end of a training program. It’s a way to
hear feedback about the training directly from the learners. For
example, survey questions or online evaluations might ask if
learners found the training valuable, if they thought it was
engaging and relevant, how they might rate the facilitator’s
expertise, how they would rate the quality of the handouts or
participant guide, if they would recommend the program to
others and why or why not, how usable the technology was,

and so on. It is at this level where you identify what
participants think and feel (cognitive and emotional learning
dimensions) about their overall learning experience.
Level 2: Learning
Level 2 evaluates participant learning and ideally new
knowledge construction. This level looks at whether
participants have created new schemas or mental models,
retained new knowledge, and acquired new skills. It’s a
measure of not only knowledge acquisition but also skills
attainment. Additionally, through reflection and learning from
others in discussions, there may also be new insights, or
participants may be more aware of things they were not
previously aware of. The metrics at this level all measure the
learning component. And learning is the foundation for using,
which comes next.
Level 3: Application
The third level is the application. Learning must be applied;
otherwise, our virtual training programs can be viewed as a
waste of time from the perspective of executives. Was there a
behavioral change? Was improvement noticeable and
measurable? Did participants apply what they learned to their
jobs based on the objectives? “This measure typically takes
place at least 30 days after the training program ends”
(Huggett 2017).
Level 4: Impact
Application is causal, and all causes have an effect.
Application’s effect in this context is the fourth level—the
impact to the organization. Usually, these kinds of metrics are
recorded in the system as productivity, waste or rework, the
time it takes us to do something, sales, customer satisfaction,
or customer complaints. For example, if learners consistently
make performance changes at Level 3, this can affect results at
an organizational level, such as raising customer satisfaction
levels or reducing employee attrition metrics. Notably, the
results in Level 4 are often the perceived value of the training
for executive leadership.

Level 5: ROI
For this level, executives may be wondering if the expensive
training programs are really working, especially if they’re
critical to the organization or connected to strategy that the
executive team cares about. This can influence decisions about
whether to devote more resources and continue the program.
For this reason, executives may request ROI. In short, return
on investment answers the question for every dollar invested
in a training program, how many dollars were returned after
the investment was recovered? The Phillips’ formula for
measuring the ROI percentage is:
Alignment Model
The ROI Institute’s Alignment Model brings it all together by
visually depicting the alignment across stakeholders’ needs
(the why), the corresponding objectives for each (the how),
and the results using the five levels (the what; Figure 10-1).
“The objectives derived directly from these needs are defined,
which makes a strong case for having multiple levels of
objectives that correspond to different needs” (Phillips,
Phillips, and Ray 2020). For virtual training, reference this
model to best understand the needs driving target objectives
and what the results will look like at each level. Implement
your program keeping targeted results in mind.
Figure 10-1. The ROI Institute’s Alignment Model

Evaluate Virtual Training to the Level Needed
Perhaps not surprisingly, the most common method of
evaluation among many organizations who do virtual training
boils down to tracking attendance. As ATD’s 2021 report,
Virtual Classrooms: Leveraging Technology for Impact attests,
the clear majority (88 percent of the hundreds of organizations
surveyed) evaluate training based on attendance and
completion.
As you are aware, just because an employee logs in to a
virtual training class and remains online for the duration does
not guarantee they learned anything, not to mention
demonstrated competency. Nor does it prove that they will
apply what they have learned to their functional work. This is
why virtual training should be evaluated above and beyond
attendance. We also need to take a closer look at our reward
system. When we award a certificate for attendance or a digital
badge for logging in at the right time and logging out at the
right time, aren’t we rewarding the wrong things? Wouldn’t it
be better to test for competency and then, once they have
demonstrated proficiency, award the digital badge or
certificate?
In the rest of this section, we’ll look at some ways to ensure
your evaluation efforts for virtual training are a success.
The Manager’s Critical Role to Aid Learning

We have long known that managers play a crucial role in the
effectiveness of their employees’ learning. But did you realize
how crucial they are? “Research has consistently shown that
the managers of a group of participants are the most influential
group in helping participants achieve application and impact
objectives, apart from their own motivation, desire, and
determination. No other group can influence participants as
much as their immediate managers” (Elkeles, Phillips, and
Phillips 2014). To take this a step further, organizations who
shared concept card reminders, reinforcement aids, follow-up
activities, or other resources with learners’ managers after the
training were significantly more likely to be high performing
(ATD 2021).
The number-one most crucial factor in whether participants
apply what they learn after attending a training session is if the
manager sets expectations with the employee before they
attend the training (Elkeles, Phillips, and Phillips 2014). This
level setting is also important for virtual training. With live
online learning, this pre-training session could be a brief on-
camera online meeting or quick phone call to reiterate why the
manager thinks the training topic is important for their direct
report, tying it into organizational goals, what they expect
from them after completing the training, and how excited they
are to hear how it goes afterward.
The second most important factor in whether employees
apply what they learn after training is if the managers follow
up afterward as well (Elkeles, Phillips, and Phillips 2014).
Managers need to be strategic—they aren’t likely to have time
to meet with every direct report before and after on every
training topic. However, for the more robust virtual training
programs and where it makes sense, they should. Either
remotely or on-site and in person, managers could ask their
direct reports what they learned from their virtual training
class, try to incorporate key action items from the training into
performance appraisal goals, or observe their demonstration of
the competency on the job and provide data back to the virtual
trainer.
PRO TIP 77

Communicate to managers the important role they
play evaluating and reinforcing what participants
learn in training.
When my virtual training programs span several weeks, I
email managers before the virtual training begins about what
their employees will be learning and what the expectations are
for the program. I also let them know that after the virtual
training, employees will have a completed action plan to share
with their manager. I give managers a heads up and ask that
they have a conversation with their employees within one
week after the program is complete to discuss their action
plan. Likewise, I make certain that all participants are aware
that their managers are there to support them and their action
plans will hold them accountable to applying the learning to
their work.
To aid the post-training discussion between managers and
virtual participants, I send managers a sample email with
suggestions for conversation starters and prompts. Figure 10-2
shows one example of an email prompt I have sent. Sometimes
managers will even respond in kind with a thank you email or
reach out to let me know they will soon be meeting with staff
or that they did meet with them. Either way, we know
managers are most influential in learners’ application in the
workplace and we need their support.
Figure 10-2. Example of Email Request for Manager
Follow-Up

Next, let’s look specifically at how you might use the ROI
Process Model, for example, to evaluate virtual training.
Hopefully, these examples will inspire and spark ideas for you
to use in your virtual training programs.
Level 1: Evaluating Learners’ Reaction to
Virtual Training
While organizations most often track virtual training by
attendance and completion, the second most common
evaluation method is Level 1 evaluations. According to ATD’s
2021 virtual training report, 68 percent of respondents
consistently evaluate with Level 1 evaluations, or “smile
sheets” as they are commonly called. This method is simple
and much quicker to implement than some of the other levels.
The goal is to gather data to inform decisions about whether to
continue offering the class or what parts to tweak and improve.
“The challenge is to keep it simple, limit the number of
questions, and use forced choice questions with space for

comments” (Phillips, Phillips, and Ray 2020). Additionally,
there may be questions to collect demographic or marketing
data like how you heard about the offering and what other
courses you would like to see, as well as a place for comments
about what they might recommend for course improvements.
Level 1 evaluation sheets often ask about criteria like:
• Whether the class met course objectives
• Perception of value and if it was worth their time
• Did they like it, and if so how much or how little and
why?
• Appropriate class or program length
• Organization of materials
• Instructor credibility, knowledge, and preparedness
• Whether the virtual training platform and tools were easy
to navigate
• If the links to course materials were simple to find
• If the digital participant guide was helpful
• Did the assignments have clear instructions?
The vast majority of my virtual training programs are
measured at this level. It’s easy to do and you can get a quick
pulse on what learners thought of the training. The secret to
getting returned and completed survey data is to keep your
evaluations short. Just ask the critical questions.
In training classes that span several weeks, I’ll give
participants a two to three question survey at the end of each
live online session to take a quick pulse check on where
people are and what they think of the class so far. You can also
use the whiteboard to have them type two to four words
describing their experience that day or use a quick online poll
from the platform to gauge how their virtual experience went.
This way you’re collecting feedback as you go. If I learn about
integral improvements that need to be quickly addressed, I can
pivot as needed in the middle of the program and genuinely
thank participants for their feedback. I always use some type
of short Level 1 evaluation at the end too and express verbally

that we love to hear feedback from learners so we can make
the program better.
Learning expert Bill Horton recommends asking online
learners to contribute as many suggestions as possible for
improving the course to generate an abundant supply of ideas
(Kirkpatrick and Kirkpatrick 2006). This helps to improve the
likelihood 
that 
you 
will 
receive 
more 
qualitative
recommendations out of a larger sample. As we learned in
chapter 2, the best ideas often come from the learners
themselves. One of my favorite things to do with Level 1
feedback throughout is to encourage learners to use emojis,
animated gestures like thumbs up, or applause to provide
feedback on how things are going for them. As with
everything, use this measure judiciously; you don’t want to
over-use it and weaken its effectiveness.
Sometimes, you can even incent learners to complete their
virtual training program evaluations by offering a drawing
with a prize at the end. Make it clear that participants will be
eligible for the drawing if they complete the evaluation. Once
they have all submitted their evaluations online—still during
class—ask them to raise their virtual hands or click the green
check so you can know when they’re done. Then use the
randomizer tool (if available on your platform) or use an
online app to scramble their names and select one for the
prize.
To provide your virtual learners access to more official
Level 1 evaluations, you can include a link in the chat or
provide a prompt follow-up email containing the evaluation.
It’s a best practice to request learners open the link and
complete the evaluation while they are still in class and submit
it digitally. To ensure a higher response rate, I try to carve out
the time for learners to complete their evaluations during the
virtual training. Make it the second to last activity you do—not
the last activity, because sometimes learners have an online
meeting right after your virtual class and have to jump out
early and then are not able to complete it. This is important
because the likelihood someone will complete the evaluation
decreases once they leave the class. We also want to end on a
high note leveraging the peak-end rule as discussed in chapter

2. For this reason, it’s best to complete evaluations in-class
right before your final, closing activity.
Keep in mind it’s all well and good to track participant
responses for Level 1. But what you do with the data is even
more important. Do you save it in a file never to be looked at
again? Do you share it with managers? Do you share it with
L&D directors, the chief learning officer, or the executive
team? Clearly, the virtual trainer needs to review response
summaries to collect feedback and input for improving the
class. The virtual trainer’s manager also needs to see a
summary of responses to inform their decisions about whether
to offer the class again.
In the past, I’ve isolated some of the best comments and
used them as marketing testimonials for promoting future class
offerings. On your evaluation, you can include a phrase that
says signing this document gives approval for your name and
comments to be used for marketing promotions. Or if they
wish to maintain anonymity (and for more honest responses),
include an option that consents to using their comments
without their name. Sometimes digitally checking a box with a
typed name or leaving the name line blank to remain
anonymous is sufficient. It’s also better to avoid participants
emailing evaluations back from an efficiency standpoint.
Instead, all results are automatically tabulated by your LMS, a
survey provider like SurveyMonkey, or other online means.
Level 2: Evaluating Learning From Virtual
Training
For Level 2, virtual trainers or novice online instructors may
forget the importance of including knowledge checks along the
way. This should be part of the built-in design of virtual
training. Instructors can include creative, fun, or feedback
opportunities where the learners may not even realize they are
being checked for new knowledge acquired in the course.
Adapted online games can work, or you can use polls for
quizzes or other apps for surveys, quizzes, and tests.
Regardless, it is an opportunity to assess the readiness of your
learners and determine if anything needs to be reviewed. In the

2021 ATD study Virtual Classrooms: Leveraging Technology
for Impact, 57 percent of organizations said they measured the
effectiveness of their virtual training programs at this learning
level with quiz scores and knowledge checks.
In my virtual training classes, I like to incorporate quizzes
as polls to check knowledge at this level. Most platforms have
polling features you can use, and some even allow you to
create and store tests that you can reuse. For example, in
GoToTraining you can create tests ahead of time and then use
them to assess competency knowledge before participants can
earn a certificate or digital badge within their LMS. MS Teams
also has the ability to link to surveys. This way you can
request learners take pre-tests and post-tests to measure any
knowledge gains by comparing pre and post scores. It’s
important to note that in writing your quiz questions, you
should emphasize what should be done versus what should not
be done. This is a clearer takeaway for the learner and more
readily aids their adoption of the knowledge and behavior you
want to see.
As we illustrated in chapter 7, another way to check
learning and understanding is by requesting learners annotate a
slide depicting imagery in which they need to correctly
diagnose something. In our example, it was medical imaging.
Annotation is also a way for learners to show you they
understood something or know where to look. In my virtual
training, I also like to leverage chat questions to check
participants’ knowledge to see if they’re tracking with me or if
we need to go back and review anything (I’ll look for gaps in
their chat answers or an extended slowness in their responses.)
As online learning expert Bill Horton explains in Evaluating
Training Programs, “you can embed evaluation events among
the learning experiences” but as an ongoing practice for check-
ins, keep them short (Kirkpatrick and Kirkpatrick 2006).
However, you cannot stop there. According to Aaron
Horwath (2021), head of learning at Creative Force, “Only
being concerned with measuring Levels 1 and 2 dooms any
hopes of measuring meaningful impact from the start.” As the
authors of Proving the Value of Soft Skills remind us, “It’s not
effective unless you have an impact” (Phillips, Phillips, and

Ray 2020). People might attend, but training success should
never be based on attendance. People may or may not enjoy it,
but this is no guarantee the organization will improve or grow.
It may contribute to retention because staff relish the
opportunity to professionally develop and enjoy time spent
away from their desks. And learners might be learning, but
there’s no guarantee they’re applying what they’ve learned.
Let’s advance to the next level and see how you might
evaluate Level 3.
Level 3: Evaluating Application From Virtual
Training
In the same spirt as the popular book title Telling Ain’t
Training, I contend that knowing ain’t doing. Just because
participants have learned how to do something in virtual
training does not guarantee they will use it. As chairman and
CEO of Allen Interactions, Michael Allen (2007), articulates,
“Education is focused on acquisition of knowledge while
training is focused on application of knowledge; in other
words, education is about knowing and training is about
doing.”
In short, Level 3 is all about application of the learning to
one’s work. Often, the impetus for training in the workplace is
some type of performance gap. So, when we measure at this
level, we are following up to see if learners were able to close
the gap. In this way, Level 3 also measures participants’
willingness and ability to improve workplace performance
through behavior change. This often requires investing more
resources in Level 3 (time and money) to observe and measure
any improvements. According to ATD’s 2021 report Virtual
Classrooms, only “slightly less than half of the over 300
organizations surveyed tracked how virtual training influenced
their on-the-job behavior.” A great example of evaluating
application is a virtual training course on cyber security.
Imagine that the course taught learners how to identify
phishing attempts that come into their email inbox and how to
recognize those suspicious emails that may be malicious.
Learners are taught to be on the lookout for multiple spelling
errors and urgency in an email message, for example. Then

two to three weeks later, the organization might send a few
fictitious emails that are indeed phishing attempts to
employees to test those who were trained. This is a way to
evaluate whether learners were able to correctly apply what
they learned by identifying each phishing attempt and
correctly reporting them to their IT department.
I recommend partnering with employees’ managers for this
level of evaluation. In the end, it is the manager who is
evaluating them for performance quarterly, semi-annually, or
annually. When I have partnered with managers for Level 3
evaluations of virtual training programs, I have provided them
with aids like conversation prompts for their action plans and
checklists for follow-up in their observation of skills, and
talked with them about incorporating key principles or action
items into their employee’s performance appraisal goals to
keep them accountable. The manager is the obvious choice as
the key contact to observe and ensure that virtual learners are
applying what they’ve learned, but our partnership of support
with managers means that we can provide resources to help
them. These aids, rubrics, key items learned, and other
performance 
support 
tools 
then 
help 
them 
measure
performance.
Partnering with an internal or external professional
evaluator for Levels 3, 4, and 5 may also be useful. We are
learning and development professionals, but not necessarily
professional evaluators. By working in partnership with an
evaluator, we can capture more data on these higher levels
more efficiently and effectively.
There are also other steps we can take to ensure behavior
change in the workplace. We discussed previously how
managers’ expectation setting with participants has the biggest
impact on learners’ application. In addition to managers
setting expectations before and after virtual training, you can
also invite virtual learners to share with their peers what they
learned afterward. This, too, can also make a difference.
According to Dorna Eriksson Shafiei, VP of Talent
Management at Atlas Copco in Stockholm, Sweden, “In
China, we developed a peer-to-peer learning approach, where
learners present what they’ve learned to their wider team.

Having discussions about how you can apply learning to your
working environment is a critical part of changing behavior”
(Van Nuys 2021). Remember, the more virtual learners talk
about it, write about it, reflect on it, or use it, the more likely
they are to apply their new knowledge on the job.
PRO TIP 78
Partner with managers to transfer ownership to
them to observe and measure application in the
workplace while you support them with aids or
evaluation rubrics.
Level 4: Evaluating Impact in Virtual Training
Once you arrive at Level 3 as a way of measuring evaluation,
you will be able to assess Level 4. I mentioned earlier about
partnering with an internal or external professional evaluator
for the higher levels (3, 4, and 5) if needed. You can also
consider partnering with stakeholders to collect Level 4 and 5
data. You support the work and guide the process, but transfer
the collection, analysis, and summary work to stakeholders or
other partners.
The advantage of Level 4 data is that much of it already
exists somewhere in the organization because these metrics are
often tracked on an ongoing basis through other means. These
could include customer satisfaction ratings, performance data,
employee engagement surveys, sales numbers, efficiency,
retention, 
costs, 
quality 
improvement, 
or 
employee
satisfaction. For example, if you conducted a virtual training
program about how to apply privacy laws in the context of
your organization’s work, you could use the number of privacy
incidents at your organization before and after the training as a
comparison metric. Remember to allow some time after the
training before measuring the impact; 30 to 90 days is
recommended. Be aware that the seeds of change can take a
while to grow before you can reap results. As learning expert
Bill Horton advises, “the kinds of business and institutional
changes you want to measure for Level 4 seldom have only
one cause. And they may take years to manifest” (Kirkpatrick
and Kirkpatrick 2006).

When I consulted with an internal department on customer
service training skills to be delivered virtually, we discussed
the regular customer service surveys they already had in place
with their external customers. As a way of measuring how
effectively the service staff were able to apply what they
learned from the customer service virtual training program, the
director and supervisors could review the data from customer
service surveys before the training as a baseline, and then,
after 30 to 90 days, review the customer service surveys again
to compare any changes to the data. In this case, the metrics
consisted of both quantitative and qualitative data.
PRO TIP 79
Partner with stakeholders or an internal or
external professional evaluator to collect
organization-wide impact data when appropriate.
Level 5: Evaluating ROI in Virtual Training
For most virtual training programs, you will likely not need to
measure to Level 5. Because of the time-intensive nature of
collecting and calculating ROI, it may be prudent to reserve
this level of evaluation for higher visibility, top-priority
projects. Sometimes we need to ask ourselves, what’s the ROI
on ROI?
However, if the C-suite requests ROI data to review, you’ll
need to provide it. They may want to see ROI on projects that
are part of the organization’s strategic goals or enterprise-wide
initiatives, for example. Additionally, Level 5 may be
appropriate for virtual training when it’s a robust program like
leadership development that is required for all leaders in the
organization and is offered multiple times per year. Executives
may be interested in seeing the ROI to ensure their investment
in this ongoing virtual training program is paying off.
According to ATD’s 2021 report Virtual Classrooms, only 25
percent of the more than 300 organizations surveyed evaluated
ROI or business results.
If you do evaluate ROI, it’s important for everyone who is
part of the project (such as designers, developers, producers,
and facilitators) to track their time and expenses from the

outset, including material costs. Later, you can make the
conversion to money where possible. When I’ve been part of
measuring ROI for virtual training programs everyone on the
project has tracked their time through an online project
management software. This made it easier for us and was also
a more reliable way to track time. It also meant that all my
time on the project, including project management meetings,
gathering feedforward advice from a few learners early on,
design and development, coordination meetings with virtual
co-facilitators, and virtual delivery were tracked accordingly.
Another example of when ROI evaluation may be
appropriate for virtual training programs is when executives
are interested in a cost comparison between traditional
classroom training converted to online delivery. Saving
expenditures 
on 
flights, 
facilities, 
food, 
and 
hotel
accommodations could be contrasted with the ROI once
converted to virtual training programs.
Overall, evaluation is important to all training. Not only is it
essential to evaluate the success of virtual training programs,
but to also provide the data we need so we know where change
is required. As discussed in chapter 2, we look to the learning
sciences as an interdisciplinary field to inform our profession
about how to improve effectiveness. At its core, science is
about observation and collecting and reviewing data to
examine the effects of something. Isn’t this what we’re also
doing when we evaluate virtual training programs? We are
collecting data to examine the effects of our training programs.
We are ensuring the virtual training programs are “doing the
job our customers hired it to do” (Christensen et al. 2016).
Future Innovative Trends in Virtual Training
The remainder of this chapter is devoted to exploring
innovation for virtual training and online adult education. This
is an exciting time for live online learning. The explosive,
widespread adoption of web conferencing, video conferencing,
and virtual training platforms in the wake of the COVID-19
pandemic have left an indelible mark. Consistent, global usage

will 
continue 
to 
drive 
technology 
improvements,
enhancements, and market competition. According to Pew
Research and Larry Irving, the former head of the National
Telecommunications & Information Administration, more
extensive use of technology will be used for remote learning
and education and this has potentially great benefits for
reskilling and upskilling staff (Anderson, Rainie, and Vogels
2021).
According to the 2021 EDUCAUSE Horizon Report,
Teaching and Learning Edition, “Learning technology stands
to become even more widely adopted on the road ahead, and
the discovery of new needs and uses for these and other
course-related tools will lead to ongoing innovations and
entirely new learning technologies” (Pelletier et al. 2021).
Let’s look next at our role as innovators in the live online
learning field. Specifically, we’ll focus on immersive
technologies, increasing global connections, and artificial
intelligence.
Immersive Technologies
One trend to watch for in synchronous virtual training is XR
(extended reality) immersive technologies. This is the
umbrella term for VR (virtual reality), AR (augmented
reality), and MR (mixed reality). These innovations, like the
so-called metaverse, can help improve trainers’ abilities to
deliver learning virtually. As part of these experiences,
facilitators can interact with learners in meaningful ways.
Virtual reality is the full immersion, where a learner might
wear a VR headset. Then, you as facilitator may lead them
through a fully immersive virtual environment with a
simulated lesson. You can see how VR might lend itself most
to learning where the spatial dimension is critical. AR is when
learners view the real world through a smartphone camera
with some digital elements overlaid on top of the live view.
MR also begins with a real-world environment, but then
blends digital objects with the real world so both can interact
together.

These immersive technologies can simulate role-play
interaction so learners can to practice a variety of topics such
as conversation skills, leadership, consulting, sales skills, or
customer service. They can then be tested on these skills to
help support behavioral change. For example, there’s a VR
simulation that allows HR professionals to practice firing an
employee with unacceptable performance. Letting an
employee go is obviously a very difficult, emotional, and
delicate conversation. “The program uses a 3D scan of a real
actor and recordings of a variety of gestures, facial
expressions, and lines of dialogue. Artificial intelligence,
speech recognition, and language processing features ensure
that the simulated employee understands what is said and
responds appropriately” (Phillips, Phillips, and Ray 2020).
Mursion.com offers VR empathy simulations where digital
actors react in the moment based on what a learner might do
and say in the simulation.
Naturally, these experiences also benefit from debrief
sessions. This is where the role of facilitator may expand in
the future to debriefing more immersive experiences. When I
designed an escape room for 300 sales staff, which they went
through in small groups, the debrief led by the employees we
trained was notably the most important part from a learning
perspective. This was where they could connect their
experience to their own work and learn from the insights of
others as they discussed how to move forward in a new way.
Immersive 
technologies 
may 
also 
provide 
greater
opportunity for learners to experience autonomy in their
learning. Participants may be able to choose from several
simulated scenarios and select the one that most interests
them, perform scenes with characters of their choosing, or
even customize the layout or context where the scene happens.
As we discussed in chapters 2 and 4, one element of
motivation we can leverage is the learner’s sense of autonomy
and self-directedness.
PRO TIP 80
Take risks in virtual training, experiment, and
continue to innovate in new ways.

Opportunities for Increasing Global
Connection
In his 1964 book Understanding Media, and in other
publications, Marshall McLuhan brilliantly foresaw how
electronic media would bring all human beings together,
writing “This is the new world of the global village.” Indeed,
our world has become a global village, and the internet was
just the beginning.
With 21st-century technology tools that are constantly
evolving, we can connect with anyone, anywhere, at any time.
For virtual training, this means that in-roads are wide open for
greater collaboration across physical distances. For example,
our virtual classes can include international participants in real
time. Obviously, this requires careful coordination with time
zones as well as thoughtful research regarding cultural
differences, appropriate customs, and language translations as
live captions (which some platforms already support). The
technical services needed for a global village will only
continue to grow and improve.
Virtual classes have few limits regarding where participants
and speakers might join. For example, if there is an expert
from across the globe who can speak on your training topic or
answer live questions with your class, this is now possible.
Virtual designers and facilitators can think broader and go
beyond our former limits of what was possible and imagine
what is now possible.
PRO TIP 81
Invite global experts to engage learners and
address their questions in real time during your
live online programs.
Artificial Intelligence in Virtual Training
One technology that is exploding is artificial intelligence (AI).
Those steeped in machine learning and AI are careful to
qualify that it is not intended to replace jobs, but rather assist
humans to perform their jobs better. As David Gering,
principal data scientist at Danaher told me, “AI is able to

analyze people’s interactions after quickly reviewing large
amounts of data. It can learn from responses in the past,
determine which are most important, and which are least
important.”
Conversational AI is also available. This is where an AI
assistant’s voice is trained on the context and conversational
nuances to respond to humans in a way that sounds and feels
natural. For example, during Google’s 2018 developer
conference, CEO Sundar Pichai unveiled and demonstrated
how Google Duplex, an AI assistant could call and book
appointments on your behalf, such as making a reservation for
you at a restaurant or scheduling a haircut (Google 2018).
These are examples of how AI technology can assist humans
by handling simple transactions and saving our time.
AI can also help virtual trainers deliver better learning
experiences. According to LinkedIn’s 2020 Workplace
Learning Report, “Artificial intelligence (AI) and machine
learning are expected to be the next big technologies to impact
learning” (Van Nuys 2020). Examples of applied AI in
education are rapidly expanding, including AI products that
listen to class discussions and highlight areas of improvement
for instructors (Fusco, Ruiz, and Roschelle 2021). There are
also AI apps that give people feedback on their presentation
skills. This service is akin to an instructional coach. Other uses
include the ability to identify participation metrics. “In this
Zoom era, we also have seen promising speech recognition
technologies that can detect inequities in which students have
a voice in classroom discussions over large samples of online
verbal discourse” (Fusco, Ruiz, and Roschelle 2021).
There are many other ways AI could serve the virtual
training field by searching for patterns in certain metrics.
Following are some potential areas where AI may be able to
specifically assist facilitators and producers in live online
learning: producer tasks and chatbots.
Producer Tasks
For organizations or training departments of one where a
producer is not available, an AI assistant could monitor chat

while the facilitator is training the class. For example, while
the facilitator is explaining concepts and annotating on slides,
AI could be programmed to monitor texts from learners and
respond in kind with brief, prescriptive answers to common
questions. If deeper questions are typed in chat, an AI assistant
could interject verbally when there’s a pause in the facilitator’s
speech and say, “Excuse me, Diana, Mary is asking what the
most important thing is to keep in mind when conducting an
effective performance review.” This way the facilitator does
not need to constantly check chat, and the producer can assist
with more major technical challenges.
AI would not replace the producer role, but it would assist
with rote tasks so the producer could focus on resolving the
more challenging issues. For example, at the outset of the
training, a facilitator might say, “Our producer Tom, our
support bot Eva, and I are all here to help you in this virtual
training program.” It’s conceivable that some day a virtual
instructor may be able to select a customized voice for their
support bot from a palette of options and perhaps even a
choice of accents. Producers would be able to offload some of
the easier technical challenges to these supportive AI agents.
Chatbots
An AI-powered chatbot or agent could serve multiple purposes
in virtual training. For one, chatbots could be programmed to
respond to the most common technical requests from attendees
in a dedicated queue and walk them through steps to
troubleshoot. For example, if a learner joins a live online
session and is not able to hear anything, they could type to the
chatbot, “I can’t hear the session, but I can see the slides.” The
chatbot would then respond with the protocol they should
follow to resolve. It’s like performance support. For example,
it might type a response like “Thank you for letting us know.
Our apologies. Please exit the platform and log in again to
reset everything.”
In the normal chat pod, AI could answer common questions
on its own or certain questions that repeatedly get asked in a
replicated virtual training class on the same topic. This would
allow the trainer to continue facilitating and skip over chat

questions for which the chatbot already posted a response.
Future virtual platform chats may also be able to accept more
than just text, like snippets of audio recordings or brief video
messages from learners. Some time in the future, AI could
even look at all responses in chat, summarize the ones that
have commonality, and report aloud in a conversational voice,
“Ms. Howles, 30 percent of participants today are asking
about. … Would you care to respond?” Adaptive learning is
when AI uniquely and intelligently adjusts accordingly after
gathering more data. For example, David Gering explained to
me, “AI observes the patterns of what you do and then re-
calibrates. The more data you collect, the smarter AI
becomes.”
Another benefit of using an AI assistant and chatbots with
virtual training participants from different countries is what
they can offer for language services. If, for example, you were
teaching a class with global attendees and a learner typed a
question in their native tongue into the chat, AI can do an
immediate translation to the facilitator’s native language so
they can understand the chat. Since chat is an immediate
medium, this would mean learners didn’t have to worry about
translations as they would still be able to chat in their native
language.
PRO TIP 82
Be open to opportunities for conversational AI to
assist with facilitation and producer roles in virtual
training.
Challenges With AI
As is true with everything, there are benefits and challenges
with AI. The major challenge is the expense. This is because
AI requires large data collection to become smarter. This
requires building sets of many questions and triaging them
with decision trees, which takes time. According to Gering,
this enables it to be better equipped to identify patterns and
offer solutions. More likely, rather than individual companies
developing AI to aid virtual training, leading virtual platforms
will find ways to integrate AI into their products and services.

This might lead to commonality in AI features, functions, and
support across platforms.
Another drawback is that AI is not entirely free of bias. For
example, it has been demonstrated that if AI analyzes data that
itself embodies bias, AI will just continue that bias. And, of
course, sometimes we just want to talk to another person.
Right? But as AI improves and becomes more human-like in
terms of responsiveness, conversational quality, and voice
sound, this apprehension may diminish. That said, perhaps AI
serves as frontline help, with more specific or thorny problems
escalated to the virtual trainer or producer.
Be Forward Minded
Around the turn of the 20th century, my grandfather-in-law
was a professional blacksmith. Soon there was talk that times
were changing, and something new was coming down the road
… literally. The new automobile was rumored to potentially
change the landscape for the blacksmithing trade. But my
husband’s grandfather didn’t believe it. He didn’t think
anything would significantly change, so he didn’t adapt. He
did not reskill. Instead, he continued to professionally shoe
horses the way he always had. When automobiles eventually
become 
popular 
enough 
that 
horse-drawn 
carriages
disappeared, he found himself out of an occupation. He lost
his job, and learned a valuable lesson the hard way. Don’t limit
your focus and your vision to where you are, look where
things are headed too. By not looking ahead and adapting, we
risk being left behind. We need to push past the limits of what
we have known to discover what could still be.
As tools and technology continue to evolve, they will
continue to bring improvements and more affordances. The
uptick in online learning budgets will also encourage new
virtual training vendors to enter the marketplace. Let’s not get
stuck doing what we’ve always done. We need to keep
pushing ourselves to be better, learn better, and train better
using evolving technology. By allowing where we’ve been to
guide us, observing where we are to inform us, and imagining

what can still be to inspire us, together we can push the
boundaries to take virtual training to the next level.
PRO TIP 83
Keep abreast of where the virtual training industry
is headed next.
Summary
You now have a blueprint for upskilling through evaluation
and innovation. In this chapter, we explored evaluating impact,
which is just one of eight essential core capabilities. Strive to
consistently evaluate the impact of your virtual training
programs. Dedicate time to assess their value, and review and
analyze data so you can continue improving program
offerings.
We also explored the potential future landscape for virtual
training. Live online training is here to stay and it’s brimming
with opportunity. More evidence-based research is still needed
to inform our practice though, especially as the technologies
that support what we do rapidly evolve and change. Continued
innovation will open the door to new ways of training and
learning in the virtual space.
The challenge will be to approach virtual training in such a
way that we give ourselves permission to move past older
paradigms, thinking patterns, tools, and the status quo. Virtual
training is a different medium with different opportunities. As
such, it necessitates a fresh perspective and mindset. It may be
a shared virtual space, but it is no longer a self-contained,
four-walled room. I prefer not to use the term virtual
classroom because room is outdated and can limit forward
thinking about what is possible. In past presentations, Bill
Horton has referred to thinking that gets stuck in the old
paradigms as “horseless carriage thinking.” The reason for this
is because people called the first automobile a “horseless
carriage.” In other words, people used old terminology to
describe something entirely new. It’s interesting that we still
say “horsepower” to measure a car engine’s power! However,
old terminology is no longer applicable and can limit our
thinking with new tools. It is my hope that you, too, are

inspired to think in new ways beyond the traditional classroom
and see the potential for greater opportunity in virtual space.
After attending and congratulating my niece on her vocal
recital at a liberal arts college, I was fortunate to also meet her
voice professor. Clearly, the professor was a very
accomplished vocalist herself. What I was surprised to
discover, however, was that she was still taking private voice
lessons herself. Here she was at a prestigious college of music
teaching vocal majors, and yet, she was still honing her craft
and developing professionally.
I believe that following a path of ongoing improvement
should be part of our journey as well. As learning
professionals who develop others, we should also be
developing ourselves. In this way, we walk our talk.
Regardless of our current proficiency level as learning
analysts, 
learning 
experience 
designers, 
developers,
facilitators, trainers, online adult educators, producers,
evaluators, managers, directors, or chief learning officers, we
must continue to professionally develop. To do this, we need
to evaluate and innovate.
As we evaluate and look for ways to improve virtual
training, it’s also important to capitalize on the benefits of
incorporating virtual training into blended learning solutions.
The next chapter examines how to use asynchronous (on
demand) and synchronous (live online) as a combined training
solution.
Pro Tips for Evaluating Impact
Skills
TIP
75
Create an evaluation plan in the design phase of your project,
and evaluate learning based on the knowledge and
performance objectives identified at the outset.
TIP
76
Determine which levels of evaluation are most important to
your customers, employees, their managers, and stakeholders
to measure the effectiveness of your virtual training programs.

TIP
77
Communicate to managers the important role they play
evaluating and reinforcing what participants learn in training.
TIP
78
Partner with managers to transfer ownership to them to
observe and measure application in the workplace while you
support them with aids or evaluation rubrics.
TIP
79
Partner with stakeholders or an internal or external
professional evaluator to collect organization-wide impact data
when appropriate.
TIP
80
Take risks in virtual training, experiment, and continue to
innovate in new ways.
TIP
81
Invite global experts to engage learners and address their
questions in real time during your live online programs.
TIP
82
Be open to opportunities for conversational AI to assist with
facilitation and producer roles in virtual training.
TIP
83
Keep abreast of where the virtual training industry is headed
next.

“Rather than asking which technology is best for learning, you
will find more fertile ground by using a blend of media that
allows you to space out learning events, provide post-training
performance support, and foster synchronous and
asynchronous forms of collaboration.”
—Ruth Colvin Clark, author, Evidence-Based Training
Methods

Flipping Virtual Training
With Blended Learning
It’s a classic story, and it’s likely happened in your
organization or perhaps one you know. Leadership decides to
transition some traditional in-person offerings to live online
delivery. They recognize the significant savings to be gained
by reducing travel costs and time away from work, while
accommodating a remote and hybrid workforce. In this
example, let’s say one of the traditional in-person classes is on
effective teamwork. The instructional goal is for leaders to
build high-performance teams and refine their people
leadership skills. Because the traditional, in-person training
was six hours of daily instruction over the course of two days,
they decide to retain the same structure for the virtual training
delivery. Essentially, this means virtual learners would now
spend six hours onscreen over the course of two days. As you
might imagine, this is actually a recipe for a snooze fest.
Although this situation may be quite common, it is not
ideal. Converting traditional classroom instruction to live
online learning is not an apples-to-apples exchange. Let’s
explore why. For example, the in-person classroom is more
controlled and there’s a variety of sensory stimuli available for
nonverbal interpretation. In contrast, virtual training lacks
access to full nonverbal cues for correct interpretation and
there is greater opportunity for distraction. Moreover, screen
time alone can be exhausting after more than two hours. We
have all experienced the fatigue that can come from long stints
of online work.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, virtual training expert
Jennifer Hofmann commented on several occasions that she

felt like we had gone backward as a virtual training industry. I
attribute this to the huge influx of many virtual newcomers
who made the sudden switch to live online learning. For
example, adopters retained the same slide deck from in-person
training without modification. But in-person delivery and
online delivery are completely different mediums. As such, we
need to design and deliver differently. “Virtual instruction is
different than in-person training because it requires even more
interaction with participants, removing technical barriers,
affirming participants’ comments, frequent visual movement,
more visuals, adding in additional breaks and shortening
chunks of time online because everyone is looking at screens,
participant prompting, frequent instructor feedback, and more”
(Howles 2020).
Another lesson recent adopters have learned the hard way is
that “less is more” in terms of how much time to schedule for
a virtual class. It’s a common mistake to think that a five-hour
in-person training can be converted to a five-hour virtual
training. As you have likely discovered, this does not work
well. In virtual training, shorter is always better.
So, what is a virtual trainer to do? How do we transfer a
robust in-person program from the traditional classroom to the
online medium? Two words: blended learning. Blended
learning solutions combine live, online instruction with
independent activities learners complete on their own outside
the live class (for example, as pre-work and post-work). It’s
also important to note that blended learning solutions combine
all the virtual trainer capabilities we’ve discussed so far:
experience design, environment shaping, online facilitation,
facilitator presence, technical fluency, dynamic engagement,
agile troubleshooting, and evaluating impact. To effectively
deliver training programs with a blended approach, you must
reach competence in each of these capabilities. This chapter
takes a closer look at not only how to increase the
effectiveness of this learning solution, but also how to create
more productive, richer, and deeper learning experiences while
doing so.
THE BIG IDEA

Blend synchronous online instruction with
asynchronous components to improve learning.
What Is a Flipped Classroom?
The flipped classroom inverts traditional instruction. Higher
education experimented with the notion of the flipped
classroom by re-examining which activities made the most
sense to do when people were together versus when people
were not. What was most profound about this shift was the
widespread realization that lectures were a passive activity for
students.
In traditional higher education, a professor would lecture to
students inside the classroom, while students would work
independently on homework outside the classroom. However,
educators realized this in-person time was being wasted in a
sense by activities that didn’t require an instructor be present.
So, flipping the classroom meant that you reversed what was
traditionally taught in a classroom with what happens outside
the classroom and vice versa.
In a flipped classroom, coursework that involves
collaboration, synergy, and discussion among students and
between students and the teacher can be completed during the
live, in-person time. To maximize time spent together in class,
there could also be group discussions, analysis, Q&A, and
other activities that rely on and involve community.
Meanwhile, instructors could then video record lectures that
students could view on their own time. “Instead of passively
receiving course content during class, students digest the
information outside of class on their own time. They might
read written materials, watch previously recorded lectures, or
listen to a podcast. Once they are in class with their
instructors, students spend 
time answering questions,
discussing material, or working in groups” (Berrett 2015).
Could some of these lessons also apply to adult professional
development and virtual training? Let’s examine this next.
What Is Blended Learning?

The flipped classroom helps us better understand the concept
of blended learning, and some aspects of the flipped classroom
can indeed transfer to virtual training programs. Although
blended learning is traditionally defined as pairing a traditional
in-person classroom with online modules or e-learning, a more
conventional definition includes pairing live online training
with a full variety of asynchronous activities or independent
work. Across a broader context, Ruth Clark notes that blended
learning uses “multiple instructional delivery media that may
allow for a combination of instructional methods” (Clark and
Kwinn 2007).
In the context of this book, I’ll refer to blended learning as
the combination of synchronous and asynchronous elements
that together comprise a program or course. This way, there
are gains for learners because they benefit from both types of
instruction. Each supports the other. For example, a blended
learning solution for a leadership development program might
include class components where learners take behavioral
assessments on their own, complete reflection activities, read
online resources, or complete a standalone tutorial or e-
learning course on leadership. All this independent study could
then also be paired with live online virtual classes where
learners have the benefit of group discussion, asking questions
and receiving answers in real time, working collaboratively, or
solving case scenario challenges in small online breakout
groups. The asynchronous work can be spread out for leaders
to complete on their own time over several weeks or months
either before, during, or after the series of live online sessions.
In sum, blended learning solutions are truly a blend of live
online class components with independent, self-paced
coursework.
What Does Asynchronous Learning Do Best?
It’s important to carefully consider which course activities
lend themselves best to asynchronous learning. Likewise,
thoughtfully consider which activities lend themselves best to
synchronous. With async, we want to strategically offload
instructional components learners can complete on their own

time, ensure they support key learning goals, and then set
timelines and deadlines for learners to complete them.
If independent work or pre-work is a required portion of the
whole program, you must make that clear to learners. In the
past, some learners tended to think of pre-work assignments as
a “nice to have” or “optional.” So, this distinction must be
clarified. I include this messaging in my welcome email to
learners up front, in the course description, and in my
welcome video for learners to view before class. Then repeat it
verbally to all again during our first day of class. Other
strategies include emphasizing that asynchronous work must
be finished before the course will be marked complete in the
LMS or to receive overall credit at all. If, however, you intend
for assignments to truly be optional, simply state as such.
As discussed in chapter 2, it’s important to look at your
objectives and the type of content you’re training on to
determine opportunities to transfer content to asynchronous
delivery. For example, if you’re training technical content,
some of the training could be offloaded to recorded demos of
how to use a new system or software, along with a job aid or
another type of performance support aid. Live class time can
then be used to address challenges with the system or resolve
issues they might have experienced. If, however, your content
is more business soft skills or people skills like how to give
constructive feedback, learners will need to practice during the
training. Skill practices usually lend themselves more to
breakout activities in the synchronous class unless you
leverage on-demand interactive case scenarios as an async
activity.
What’s important about asynchronous activities is that they
can also include community interaction, which supports the
social dimension of learning. For example, in an online
discussion forum through your LMS or a course management
system, learners can interact asynchronously with ideas shared
by posting insights, questions, and comments as they interact
with peers in the class and the facilitator.
Another example of an async activity is an interactive
scenario that contextualizes learning by placing it in a real-

world situation. Here the learner is called upon to act and
make choices on their own through an independent simulation
or module. Afterward, learners can meet in a live online class
to debrief the experience, taking advantage of what
synchronous learning does best. These live discussions help
learners connect what they’ve learned in the scenario to the
real world; specifically, their contextual workplace. Ideally,
you could even end the scenario with a cliff hanger like “What
would you do now?” and then allow learners to think about it
and discuss what actions could be taken during live online
class time.
According to Bundy and Howles’ 7 Cs Framework for Case
Scenarios, a well-designed case scenario involves the interplay
of seven Cs, wherein each reinforces and complements the
others for deeper learning (Bundy and Howles 2017). When
all these components are used to create case scenarios,
participants will experience an interactive, compelling
situation from which they can make decisions and learn.
Integrate the 7 Cs when you create asynchronous interactive
scenarios for your learners.
Bundy and Howles’ 7 Cs Framework for Case Scenario
Design:
1. Challenges. It’s best to reframe learning objectives as
challenges and place learners in a challenging situation
from the beginning of the scenario. Clearly present them
with the problem they need to tackle and resolve.
2. Context. The context places learners in an immersive,
real-world situation. Include the location and setting to
help learners become more immersed in an environment
and trigger their imagination.
3. Characters. Every good story includes people. In
scenarios, learners become agents who can actively make
decisions and interact with other characters. This adds
more complexity and depth. Some characters may guide
learners toward different trajectories, provide
information, or offer different perspectives. It’s always
helpful to personalize learning by giving characters
names and job titles as well.

4. Content. You cautiously want to include only enough
content to support learners’ doing and decision making.
Add what is needed to carry the narrative. Exposing
learners to challenging decisions with multiple options is
also more realistic for them.
5. Choices. The scenarios need realistic points for learners
to gather information, make decisions, and then receive
feedback on their choices.
6. Consequences. Results from a scenario can be
consequential feedback. In other words, learners
experience the impacts of their decision. Corrective,
explanatory feedback should be strategically placed right
after decision making.
7. Connections. This is something the facilitator begins
beforehand by setting up the experience. This is called
pre-briefing. It lets them know what to expect by priming
them before the activity. The connection piece also
includes the time after the live virtual training, where
learners can debrief and discuss how to connect it to the
real world. This gives learners the opportunity to reflect
on their choices and benefit from hearing multiple
viewpoints from others’ learning experiences too.
At the end of this chapter, I’ve included an example of a
learning simulation from Attensi, which also demonstrates
how asynchronous case scenarios can be paired with live
learning. These interactive scenarios allow for the rich
discussion and deeper dive analysis within a context. If a
learner is interacting with avatars in a contextual situation and
asked to make decisions that affect where the scenario goes
from there, this leverages the social dimension of learning
through an interaction with the avatar. The cognitive
dimension is also apparent because of the mental effort
required throughout. There is also an abundance of emotional
engagement built into scenarios (for example, motivation,
tension, risk, curiosity, and arousal), which helps make it
memorable. Finally, there’s a behavioral dimension where you
are doing things by drawing from what you you’ve learned in

the past, finding the information you need to make decisions,
and, ultimately, moving through the course.
Here are some asynchronous learning activities you can
incorporate in your blended learning courses:
• Videos
• Podcasts
• On-demand interactive case scenarios
• Published articles
• Pre-class e-learning tutorials
• Pre- and post-tests or quizzes
• Reflection writing
• Independent assignments
• Job aids or other types of performance support
• Infographics
• Discussion forum threads
• Independent skill practices
• Review postings on a networking community of practice
• Post-class boosters (such as text messages, emails,
quizzes, or learning nuggets sent from facilitator or an
LMS)
PRO TIP 84
Offload independent class activities as
asynchronous course components instead.
Most of these async activities lend themselves best to
independent study and assignments. They are a great way to
support what learners discuss and practice during the live
online sections. Thinking and reflection are great indicators for
which activity might work better as asynchronous. As Ruth
Clark and Ann Kwinn (2007) summarize, “When time and
reflection will benefit learning, asynchronous self-paced media
permit learners to work independently at their own rates to
complete assignments.”

What Does Synchronous Learning Do Best?
Next let’s explore what synchronous does best. To begin,
synchronous training is a natural conduit for deeper
discussion, participatory activities, and social interaction. A
guiding question is, “What instructional activities lend
themselves best to online face-to-face interactions and real-
time collaboration?” When we offload some of the learning
that can be done asynchronously, “live class time is freed up
for higher levels of learning such as analysis, discussion,
application, example review, and evaluation. This approach
primes the learner ahead of time” (Howles 2020). Blended
learning expert Jennifer Hofmann (2004) adds, “synchronous
classroom time should be used for clarification, questions,
collaboration, and application—all based on the asynchronous
work completed prior to the live event.” Offloading some of
this learning not only yields more prepared learners and richer
discussions, but also invites lively interaction. According to
global talent analyst Josh Bersin (2020), “Through the process
of asking questions, providing advice, giving context, and
explaining specific examples and solutions, an instructor
brings learning to life for each individual in their own
meaningful way.”
Let’s focus on how synchronous learning capitalizes on
social interaction. This social learning then supports
engagement. “In a live, instructor-led experience, employees
can interact in a way that fosters collaboration, potentially
increasing learner retention and employee engagement”
(Bersin 2020). We want to leverage the activities in our sync
time together that make the most of our shared community. It
is the value-add a live vILT facilitator brings to a synchronous
class and it requires thoughtful design. It is worth noting that
there is an element of learning for all of us that is
fundamentally social. For example, think about how you first
learned language as a toddler. You likely learned your native
tongue socially, from those who raised you. With synchronous
learning, we leverage all four learning dimensions (cognitive,
emotional, social, and behavioral), but especially the social
dimension.

In terms of appropriate length for the synchronous
component, I recommend 90 minutes as the sweet spot, but
live synchronous time can be anywhere from one to two hours.
In a 90-minute session, for example, we do not want to waste
precious live time watching a 15-minute video. That video is
best assigned as required pre-work for learners to do before
class day. You can see how this frees up time for activities
with real-time interaction. One of the best benefits of
offloading these activities is that they can help prepare learners
for the topic before the live class. I have found live group
discussions to be much richer are as a result.
Activities that lend themselves best to the synchronous class
include:
• Presenting and receiving corrective feedback
• Delivering a teach-back and receiving feedback
• Doing a skill practice and receiving feedback
• Practicing a role-play exercise
• Large-group discussion
• Small-group breakout discussions
• Critiquing good examples and non-examples as a group
• Analysis
• Brainstorming
• Live question and answer periods
• Applying what learners will do back on the job
• Collaboration activities
• Problem solving in small groups
PRO TIP 85
Leverage the dynamics of synchronous class time
for live discussion, small group breakouts,
collaboration, brainstorming, analysis, problem solving,
or skill practices with feedback.
The Magic Is in the Mix

Blended learning solutions, then, combine the best of both
worlds. There is the instructional benefit of a real-time
facilitator, the heightened energy of live interaction, and the
opportunity to interact with other learners in real time. This
then can be coupled with asynchronous reflection, review, and
independent work to support the overall learner goals. This
“down time” also supports learning by allowing participants to
go at their own pace, review as often as needed, complete
activities when it works best with their schedule, and not be
overwhelmed by all the competing stimuli in a synchronous
class. As Ruth Clark and Ann Kwinn (2007) point out,
“consider 
supplementing 
the 
virtual 
classroom 
with
asynchronous events, which impose less cognitive load by
allowing learners to review and reflect at their own pace. By
bringing together both synchronous and asynchronous
elements, learners benefit from the strengths of both.
So, what might your learning solution look like if you used
a blended model? Figure 11-1 shows a sample blended
learning solution. For example, you might follow this
sequence:
• Require a welcome video to be viewed before class.
• Meet as a live class.
• Complete more assignments independently.
• Meet as a live class again.
• Assign post-work or execute action plans.
Figure 11-1. Blended Virtual Training Program
Regarding the welcome videos mentioned in chapter 3, a
one- to two-minute welcome video is a great way to introduce
yourself, set expectations, and emphasize that pre-work and all
coursework must be completed as program requirements. For
example, required pre-work you might highlight in such a
video could include logging into the LMS to take a pre-test,
complete a self-paced tutorial, take a brief e-learning module,

view a Vyond animated video, complete a worksheet, or
conduct a tech check of your hardware and software.
PRO TIP 86
Use blended learning to blend the best of both
synchronous and asynchronous elements for a
comprehensive virtual training program.
Benefits of Blended Learning
Many research studies have looked at blended learning over
the years. Blended learning solutions not only combine the
best of the live online delivery medium and asynchronous
activities, but there is also empirical evidence to support its
superiority for learning. The results suggest learners
demonstrate improved outcomes with blended learning. As
Ruth Clark (2020) explains, “Because not all media deliver all
methods, 
evidence 
suggests 
that 
blended 
learning
environments are more effective than pure classroom or pure
digital learning.” The US Department of Education discovered
significant learning gains in courses with blended learning
media contrasted with only traditional classroom or only
online learning (Means et al. 2009). Let’s explore some of the
reasons behind why blended learning solutions are so
beneficial.
Spaced Repetition
To begin, blended solutions aid learning because they are more
conducive for spaced repetition. And spaced repetition helps
learning. When participants complete pre-work, attend live
class, do asynchronous assignments, attend another live class,
and finish post work on their own, there are several review
points for material spaced in intervals over time. Cognitive
psychology has served us well by teaching us about the power
of learning over spaced intervals. This means content material
is reviewed again and again with spaces in between reviews.
As educational neuroscientist Janet Zadina (2014)—explains,
“Spaced repetition has been shown to be one of the most
effective ways to encode information into long-term memory.
We know that repetition is important, but there also needs to

be some space—some time—between repetitions. The ideal
amount of time is that the repetition occurs when we are about
ready to forget the information.” To better understand this,
imagine you attended a virtual training session on negotiation
skills. You learned several concepts about successful
negotiation, but after leaving that session you don’t do
anything with them and do not apply or use them. How much
of it would you remember? Very little. And the next time you
had to negotiate something, which might be a month later, you
likely went back to doing what you always did.
Spacing out content in your blended virtual training
programs can be powerful. For example, you can have pre-
work that introduces a topic, synchronous class time to model
and discuss it, and then launch a discussion forum on your
LMS for participants to continue the discussion outside the
live class.
For knowledge to transfer from working memory to long-
term memory, it needs to be worthy of reuse. In other words,
our brains have a system that prioritizes everything we need to
know by how often we use it (or how often we fire the brain
neural pathways for the information). The more we do
something with the content—think about it, talk about it, use
it, write about it, and apply it—the more it becomes wired in
our neural pathways and the more likely we are to then store it
in long-term memory for later retrieval.
Testing Effect
Blended learning solutions not only allow for more spaced
learning, but also more recall through quizzing or polling. The
testing effect suggests that simply by being asked to recall
information, we are wiring our brains to be able to recall it.
The more we recall the information, the better we are at
retrieving it.
When virtual learners are quizzed or tested, they are
recalling and firing up those pathways again. For this reason,
quizzing supports learning. To quiz, you can incorporate polls
as knowledge checks or pull up an online survey in your
virtual training platform. As we’ve discussed, quizzes can also

be assigned as async components between live online classes.
Learners might struggle to recall new concepts initially, but
once they do, they’ll be able to retrieve them more easily in
succession. This is just one more opportunity to fire those new
neuropathway connections and wire the new information to
long-term memory.
PRO TIP 87
Quiz learners with review questions to practice
recall and receive corrective feedback.
Reflection
Another reason why blended learning is beneficial is because
it allows for more built-in opportunities for reflection. If you
have the luxury of an LMS or course management system, you
can leverage discussion threads as excellent platforms for
learner reflection. They allow learners to step back from the
live session and marinate on the topics discussed, concepts
introduced, and, most important, their own application.
Asynchronous discussion forums can be insightful venues for
reflection on what participants learn and how they will use
what they’ve learned in their functional role. It also facilitates
space between learning events for increased processing time
and repetitive review.
One thing we’ve learned over the years about discussion
forums is that learners don’t usually do them unless they’re
required. Always prompt learners with open-ended questions
to spark discussion. It’s also best to be specific in your
instructions (Figure 11-2). Sometimes I’ll write at the top of
the thread, “Please add a comment of your own reflecting on
the prompt above, as well as respond substantively to one of
your colleagues’ comments.” This way expectations are clear.
They can’t just say “I agree,” “not exactly,” or “good point” to
a colleague. They must reflect more deeply. In his book
Teaching Online, William A. Draves (2000), president of the
Learning Resources Network advises the following to help
stimulate increased interaction in discussion threads: Make
your expectations for participation clear, create door openers
by asking learners to tell you more, look for connections
among participants and comment on those connections to

spark greater posted conversation, ensure there’s always a
response to every comment whether it be from peers or
facilitators, and spend more time nurturing the discussion
threads initially but then step aside once learners demonstrate
more self-directed behavior).
Figure 11-2. Asynchronous Discussion Thread Example
Because reflection is so important for learning, let’s look at
some prompt questions to spark reflection in your learners.
Some questions you might consider posting in a discussion
thread, asking in a live session, or including on a digital
worksheet assignment include: “What resonated most with you
in the live session today?” or “Were you engaged during the
session? If so, share your observations about why you were.”
According to author Carmen Simon (2016), when we use
reflective attention, “we promote long-term memory because
of a process called elaborate encoding.” Elaborate encoding is
when we try to make information that may be new to us more
memorable. This way, memories can become stronger when
activated again over time (Simon 2016). For this reason and
for the sake of learning, it is always good to incorporate

reflection into our virtual training programs, especially
through asynchronous components.
I once attended a virtual training all about reflection. Quite
ironically, the facilitators did not initiate any practice for us to
stop and actively reflect—even though the training was on
reflection and why we should incorporate it into our training.
You see the blind spot, right? Our paradigm from traditional
classroom education is to passively absorb information while
an instructor speaks. This certainly has its place with
foundational knowledge. Yet in the business world and in
training and talent development, we must apply to see
individual performance and organizational improvement. This
is very different than knowing all about something. For
instance, as a new driver, one might earn top scores in their
driver’s education class because they successfully learned all
about driving content. But once they get behind the wheel,
they may not be very skilled at the doing aspect. This is
because knowing ain’t doing. If learners don’t apply what
they’ve learned during a training, they are less likely to apply
it on the job. Incorporate opportunities for your learners to
reflect on their learning experience through the asynchronous
activities of your blended learning programs.
Overall, blended learning offers many advantages. It allows
for greater opportunity to boost learning by incorporating
spaced repetition, the testing effect, and reflection. To put it
into action, first examine your performance and knowledge
objectives and determine which learning activities best achieve
them, as discussed in chapter 2. Then determine whether these
activities can be completed by learners independently or are
best reserved for synchronous class time. Remember it’s
important to optimize higher levels of learning activities like
analysis, discussion, application, example review, and
evaluation for live online time. For example, you might
“engage in group problem-solving activities that build upon
concepts covered in the pre-work” (Howles 2015). Likewise,
reading, viewing, and reflection activities are usually reserved
for async-type activities.

Example of Blended Learning Components
Let’s combine what we’ve discussed so far into a real example
so you can see how this might be implemented. In a train-the-
trainer virtual class I’ve taught, I communicate learning
objectives to participants’ managers ahead of time, and let
them know that their employees will be creating action plans
that will be shared with managers so they can help hold them
accountable for application. Learners are then sent a simple
initial activity right before the program begins. It is usually a
welcome video of my talking head in which I welcome them,
introduce myself, set expectations for the course, and convey
I’m excited to meet them and work with them. In our first live
class together, we engage in discussion activities and
breakouts using the various tools we discussed in chapter 7.
On their own and before the next live class, they are given
assignments like writing their own objectives, as well as
independent e-learning tutorials to complete on the topic. The
expectation is that this e-learning must be completed before
our next live class. This continues again for the second class.
After meeting for the second live class, they once again have
some assignments to complete and a podcast to listen to or
some articles to read. After meeting for the third live class, I
send them booster email reminders summarizing the biggest
takeaways one day, one week, and one month after the virtual
program concludes (1x1x1). Additionally, all action plans are
shared with managers, and managers are asked to have
discussions with their employees within one week of
completing the program. The employee does not receive a
digital badge in the LMS for the program until all required
pre-work, coursework, assignments, and action plans are
complete. Next, let’s look more specifically at how pre-work
can assist on the front end and boosters can assist on the back
end.
Pre-Work
Pre-work can be a great opportunity to whet learners’ appetite
for the training topic and trigger their curiosity and mental
framework for the training. In my experience, they come to

class with more questions and ready to discuss the topic when
they were required to complete pre-work. I find that our live
class discussions are richer because they invested effort ahead
of time. According to a 2021 ATD research report, 65 percent
of 
more 
than 
430 
professional 
talent 
development
professionals said they included required pre-work before
learners attend a live online session (ATD 2021). This might
be a standalone e-learning tutorial learners must complete
before the live class. After the live class, there might be
another tutorial to complete with a few coursework
assignments built in, which then prepares them for the next
online class. Figures 11-3 and 11-4 show examples of tutorials
and pre-work assignments I’ve used for some of my classes.
Pre-work may include initial reading, videos, or self-paced e-
learning modules. Figure 11-3 was published in The Learning
Guild’s Learning Solutions as an example of a self-paced
asynchronous tutorial (Howles 2015).
Figure 11-3. Pre-Work Tutorial Example Using Articulate
Storyline
Figure 11-4. Pre-Work Module Example Using Rise 360

PRO TIP 88
Assign required asynchronous pre-work to
learners for them to complete prior to the live
class to prime the pump and whet their appetite for the
topic.
If some learners have not completed pre-work assignments,
we do not reward them for not completing them. In other
words, do not go over the pre-work in detail to fill them in.
You can quickly summarize or discuss and analyze and then
apply the content to worked examples for more learning, but
do not fully explain them again. This teaches learners that they
need to complete their pre-work or they will be lost during
class. If you repeat and review everything in the pre-work,

participants will learn they didn’t have to do it anyway. Pre-
work is designed to be pre-work.
PRO TIP 89
To ensure all learners complete pre-class
assignments, track completions through your LMS
or have learners submit something to you once they
are done (such as a digital worksheet).
You may be thinking, “That sounds great, but my learners
won’t complete the pre-work because they never do.” I’ve
worked with clients on a coordinated approach to address this.
In the welcome video, we clarify that all coursework (async
and sync) and post-class action plans must be completed
before receiving credit for completion of the program and their
digital badge from the LMS.
But here is the real secret to ensuring learners complete the
pre-work: Track completions for everyone, and individually
follow up with those who don’t complete it by the deadline,
which should be two days before the live class. For example, if
your first live class is April 10, your deadline would be April
8. Email whomever did not complete it on April 9.
Surprisingly, they often apologize and thank you for reminding
them. In my experience, they often get it to you the day before
the session. You can also require them to send you something
once they have completed it. Alternatively, you could track
their completions with your LMS.
PRO TIP 90
As soon as the due date has passed, follow up
individually with learners who have not yet
completed their required pre-work.
Another key component of pre-work is the welcome video
we discussed in chapter 3. Figure 11-5 is an example of an
instructor welcome video script to give you an idea for what
you might say. Notice the use of personal pronouns to leverage
Richard Mayer’s Personalization Principle as discussed in
chapter 6, and the use of contractions to create the
conversational feel. This can be sent to participants to view
before your first live class.

Figure 11-5. Sample Script of a Trainer Welcome Video
Boosters
The best way to define a booster is with the help of a
healthcare metaphor. Think about when you need to get a
vaccine to prevent infection and disease from a virus. You
were likely given your first shot, and then after a period of
time passed, you likely received a second shot or a booster.
Why? Because it bolstered and strengthened your overall
immune system’s readiness response if your body were ever to
encounter that virus.
When we apply this concept to learning, it works in a
similar fashion. After initially being exposed to new content,
processes, procedures, and concepts, over a period we forget
the information if we don’t do something with it. A booster is
something offered to us after an initial period has passed
regarding something we were recently taught. Boosters are
easy to do if you can leverage an automated LMS where you
or your L&D colleagues can preset the messages and their
dates and times. Email and even text messages can also work
well for sending boosters.
My favorite booster format is 1x1x1. This means I
summarize key content and push it to learners one day, one

week, and one month after the last virtual training session in
the program concludes. Sometimes this is through emails from
me, or I’ve leveraged an LMS to automatically send booster
messages to participants. There are also many digital apps
available to support pushing booster reminders (sometimes,
even through text messaging) to learners. In the first booster, I
often summarize key takeaway points as a quick nugget
summary for their review.
The second booster is a quiz of all the key points, where
learners can test themselves. I also include an answer key at
the very bottom in small print, so they can check their
answers. Occasionally, I’ll receive an email from a learner
where they share excitedly that they “nailed it” and got them
all correct. Not only does this motivate learners even more
with the emotional dimension of learning, but it also leverages
the testing effect where they are actively recalling the
information.
The third booster features an example or testimonial of how
a learner successfully applied what they learned so far, or a
celebration of a learner who has already implemented a part of
their action plan. Their success can motivate others, and this
booster usually includes other ideas for application and
additional resources related to the training topic that might be
of interest to participants.
PRO TIP 91
Send 1x1x1 boosters (one day, one week, and
one month after a virtual training program
concludes) to remind learners of key takeaways, or
quiz them via emails, texts, or automated LMS
messages.
Async Role Plays
One learning activity that is traditionally viewed as a
synchronous activity is the role play. Ideally, a facilitator
would model in abbreviated form what is expected, and then
learners would follow by skill practicing themselves. When
the facilitator models it first, they may use a seasoned
producer to role play with them, a co-facilitator, or a learner

volunteer or plant (who was asked and agreed to assist ahead
of time) if you prep them appropriately. If we approach this by
thinking out of the box, however, this activity could also be
offloaded to an asynchronous format. Let’s explore how that
might work.
A facilitator could assign this activity as something to be
completed out of class in partnership with other learners.
Leveraging learner agency and participant choice as we
discussed in chapter 4, you could also invite learners to sign
up for slots, choose their own partners, and select from one of
three role play topics themselves. The assignment could
specify that learners would need to work together outside class
with access to the virtual training platform, or leave it up to
them to find a way to video record themselves. They would
need to rehearse their role play and then do a final recording of
their skill practice. It would then be up to the partners to
upload their final role play video to a repository pre-
designated by the facilitator for better organization and
coordination. For example, it could be uploaded to a course
management system, placed in a shared Dropbox folder, or
uploaded to a private YouTube channel for the facilitator to
then view and critique.
The facilitator then could email written or audio feedback of
their comments to each duo, highlighting what went well and
what could be improved for next time. This is just one idea for
how you might offload an activity that is normally done during
live class to asynchronous assignments. By offloading, we can
capitalize more on the social, behavioral, and emotional
dimensions of learning during synchronous class time.
Let’s look at one more example of how you might consider
taking something traditionally taught live and exploring why it
might be beneficial to offer it asynchronously instead.
Videos
As mentioned previously, assigning videos for your learners to
watch out of class before attending live online learning can be
extremely valuable. It whets their appetite and prepares them

for what’s to come. If you do not have video resources, there
are abundant resources on the web you can curate as well.
As you assign videos to your learners as asynchronous
components, it’s important to understand viewer habits when it
comes to playing videos. This will help you edit a video, or
direct learners to view only a certain portion, or position it
better so they’re motivated to watch all of it. TechSmith
Corporation has conducted a fascinating study repeatedly on
what keeps people’s interest when they watch videos, and why
people stop watching them (Figure 11-6). They discovered the
sweet spot for ideal video length to be just a few minutes:
“Across all countries in our most recent study, the majority of
viewers prefer instructional and informational videos in the
ranges of three to four and five to six minutes” (TechSmith
2018).
If you think that professional video quality is one of the
main reasons people keep watching a video, TechSmith’s
research findings will surprise you. Instead, the top reasons
viewers appear to keep watching is when they are genuinely
interested in the topic, believe the content is relatable to them,
and were drawn in by the speaker (TechSmith 2018). Less
important variables included being required to watch it,
whether it was humorous or unique, and the audio quality.
Figure 11-6. Why Viewers Keep Watching Videos

If we switch gears, what do you think might be the top
reasons people stop watching videos? TechSmith’s research
study discovered that the biggest reasons why individuals stop
watching is because they are not receiving the information
they expected, they were bored or found the content
uninteresting, or they needed to do something else (Figure 11-
7; TechSmith 2018). Once again, poor professional quality
didn’t seem to matter as much, along with entertainment value
or distractions.
Figure 11-7. Why Viewers Stop Watching Videos
What does this tell us in terms of assigning videos as
asynchronous activities with blended courses and live online
learning? The takeaway is that we want to position the video
and its content by tying it into participants’ interests and
setting accurate expectations upfront for how it will benefit
them to view the video. We also want to tell participants what
to focus on while viewing. For example, “when you watch this
video, notice the cause of the problem and the result of each
solution they try.” These videos then can be assigned to
learners to watch asynchronously in preparation for debriefing
during live classes.
PRO TIP 92
When you assign videos for learners to watch
asynchronously, give a direction prompt for what

to be watching for and how it will benefit them.
While some virtual trainers choose to show videos during
the live class, there can be bandwidth issues resulting in freeze
frames and quality issues for some participants. Despite
troubleshooting ahead of time, inevitably at least one
participant often seems unable to view the live video
synchronously. The backup plan for this is to place the link to
the video in the chat. Then participants can independently
view while their cameras and microphones are off. When
they’re done viewing the video, they can return to the platform
and select feedback reaction like the green check or the
animated thumb’s up to signal they have returned. Playing a
video during class certainly can be done, but I have found over
the years that it doesn’t always work smoothly. Therefore, I
prefer to offload my videos as asynchronous pre-work or post-
work assignments. I clarify they’re required, and highlight the
short runtime.
To foster rich discussions later, you can apply some of the
following techniques. One technique is to capture key
screenshots of the video to stimulate learners’ memory, and
display them as you begin the group discussion. Also, to prime
discussion and help learners get over the inertia we talked
about in chapter 4, you can ask a good, open-ended prompt
question like “What surprised you most about this video?”
Then answer the question first with an example to prompt
discussion and get the ball rolling.
Business Use Cases of Blended Learning
Next let’s look at two global organizations that have
successfully 
paired 
asynchronous 
and 
synchronous
components such as live virtual training into blended learning
solutions. Attensi and Aon have both successfully combined
live online components with on-demand elements.
Attensi
Attensi is a Norwegian company headquartered in Oslo with
additional offices located around the world. Their expertise is
gamified simulation training. They use advanced 3D

modelling to train employees in custom workplace scenarios.
These simulations allow employees to interact with their
software. Their software’s immersive design incents repetition
with rewards reflected on leader boards. Although Attensi’s
software may be used as asynchronous on-demand modules, it
can also be paired with live online training as a blended
learning program. This way, learners debrief their simulated
experiences, which helps them make connections through live
discussion and analysis.
For example, a global management consultancy used
Attensi’s gamified simulation platform to enhance engagement
during their live online sessions (Figure 11-8). Their training
offerings focused on behavioral topics such as client
engagement, professionalism, agile team management, and
project management best practices.
Figure 11-8. Attensi Asynchronous Simulation
“For behavioral topics, allowing a participant the
opportunity to immerse in an engaging simulation, test out
different approaches, and understand potential outcomes
before discussing these experiences as part of a breakout group
has been highly impactful,” shared Huw Newton-Hill, sector
leader for professional services at Attensi. “Taking one
solution for example, 98 percent of participants felt better

prepared for their role and we know the learning sticks, as 93
percent said that reflections and learning from the simulation
helped them in their everyday life, according to a survey taken
five months after the training. For skill-based topics,
facilitators have focused on the competition features within the
Attensi platform to host live battles to drive engagement in the
training during a live session. This has proven to spill over
into deeper engagement in the self-directed learning
components of a program.”
Aon
Aon is a professional firm that sells financial risk-mitigation
products such as health insurance plans, insurance, and
pension administration. They employ approximately 50,000
employees in 120 countries and are headquartered in London,
United Kingdom.
According to Kelly Eno, Aon learning leader with the
business services global contact center, they are responsible
for upscaling approximately 1,200 call center agents annually
for Medicare open enrollment season. They use a blended
learning approach that incorporates both live online training
with digital, self-paced e-learning modules.
“Our focus is new hire agent training, which is a four-week
onboarding program,” Eno says. “The asynchronous modules
are created with Vyond and Articulate 360, and trains agents to
educate Medicare-eligible customers about their supplemental
insurance options and ultimately match them with a Medicare
supplement plan. When agents complete the on-demand
modules, we find they are more engaged in their learning and
appreciate the opportunity to review content at their own pace.
“In the live online classes, we use two facilitators per virtual
class with no more than 25 participants,” she continues. “One
facilitator serves as online producer while the other facilitator
delivers the training. We heavily use breakouts for small group
work. For example, breakouts are used to help agents practice
mock calls and problem solve potential customer situations.
Breakouts are also used to form small study groups. We

leverage online breakouts as a great way to build colleague
relationships and increase colleague engagement.”
Summary
Blended learning solutions offer many advantages. By
combining live online training with asynchronous components,
we create learning programs that extend beyond one-time
training events. The benefits are numerous: improved learning
outcomes based on evidence-based research reinforcement of
material, built-in review and spaced repetition for improved
memory encoding, less taxing on learners when they can do
some work independently, and increased time for reflection,
absorbing, and reinforcing over time. This mix is the best of
both worlds, with on-demand and live, real-time opportunities
to support deeper learning. As Ruth Clark (2020) summed up
beautifully in this chapter’s opening quotation, “Rather than
asking which technology is best for learning, you will find
more fertile ground by using a blend of media that allows you
to 
space 
out 
learning 
events, 
provide 
post-training
performance 
support, 
and 
foster 
synchronous 
and
asynchronous forms of collaboration.”
Ultimately, our goal is to make impactful change in our
organizations. Folding virtual training into blending learning
solutions is one way to do this. Blended learning also supports
all four of the learning dimensions we discussed in chapter 2.
With asynchronous components, participants can experience
the cognitive, emotional, and behavioral dimensions of
learning. Through synchronous class time, learners experience
it socially with their peers and instructor, behaviorally through
tasks and skill practices with feedback, and cognitively and
emotionally.
In the next chapter, we’ll explore another type of blend that
incorporates the hybrid mix of both online and on-site
participants learning together in real time.
Pro Tips for Applying Blended
Learning

TIP
84
Offload independent class activities as asynchronous course
components instead.
TIP
85
Leverage the dynamics of synchronous class time for live
discussion, small group breakouts, collaboration,
brainstorming, analysis, problem solving, or skill practices with
feedback.
TIP
86
Use blended learning to blend the best of both synchronous
and asynchronous elements for a comprehensive virtual
training program.
TIP
87
Quiz learners with review questions to practice recall and
receive corrective feedback.
TIP
88
Assign required asynchronous pre-work to learners for them to
complete prior to live class to prime the pump and whet their
appetite for the topic.
TIP
89
To ensure all learners complete pre-class assignments, track
completions through your LMS or have learners submit
something to you once they are done (such as a digital
worksheet).
TIP
90
As soon as the due date has passed, follow-up individually
with learners who have not yet completed their required pre-
work.
TIP
91
Send 1x1x1 boosters (one day, one week, and one month
after a virtual training program concludes) to remind learners
of key takeaways, or quiz them via emails, texts, or automated
LMS messages.
TIP
92
When you assign videos for learners to watch asynchronously,
give a direction prompt for what to be watching for and how it
will benefit them.

“The separation of functions, and the division of stages,
spaces, and tasks are characteristic of literate and visual
society … These divisions tend to dissolve through the action
of the instant and organic interrelations of electricity.”
—Marshall McLuhan, media professor, philosopher, and
author

Combining Online and On-
Site Learners in Live Mixed
Learning
The class was intentionally kept small. Today there would be a
total of 14 learners. Antonio arrived early to the in-person
classroom to allow for any last-minute tweaks to the setup.
The week before he had met with an IT technician to test and
check all the hardware and software. There were a few
hiccups, like when the overhead speakers in the room created
some sound system feedback. This reminded him that during
the netiquette guidelines he’d need to ask on-site participants
to keep their built-in microphones muted on their laptops if
they logged into the virtual training platform from the physical
classroom.
Learners had been given the option to choose how they
wanted to attend the training. Registration for virtual spots
filled up fast, which wasn’t surprising because several
employees were connecting from other parts of the country,
and others chose to attend virtually because they were working
remotely full time. However, six learners registered to attend
in person, some of whom had shared that they missed real-
time interaction and were really looking forward to being in
the same room again. They normally worked on-site a few
days a week and worked remotely the rest of the time.
Although Antonio was lead trainer today, he was partnering
with Mishika, a colleague in his talent development
department who would serve as the virtual co-facilitator.
Mishika had just logged in to Microsoft Teams from her home

office. Eddie also joined virtually as their IT technician and
would stay on as a remote attendee for the duration. This way
Eddie would be able to troubleshoot technical issues
immediately if needed.
The technology they were using to facilitate class for both
on-site and online learners was ClickShare Conference, a
wireless conferencing system. Logitech cameras were installed
in the front of the room to capture a view of the learners, and
another camera was placed in the best location to capture
Antonio. Both cameras were high-definition video and had
roaming features, so they moved on their own to zoom in and
follow whoever was speaking or pan out when multiple people
spoke. Antonio wore a wireless microphone to ensure virtual
participants could always hear him well, which also gave him
more freedom and mobility in the room. Additionally, the
physical training room was equipped with microphones and
speakers in the ceiling to pick up the audio from in-room
participants.
As learners began to physically enter the training room and
join online, Antonio welcomed the in-room learners and
Mishika greeted the virtual learners. Some logged in virtually
and said they couldn’t hear anything, so Eddie worked with
them right away to resolve their issues by communicating via
chat. Just knowing Eddie would be there to help them with
technical issues helped Antonio and Mishika relax a lot more.
After a brief ice breaker, learners were asked to raise their
physical or virtual hand if one of three statements related to
the training topic was true for them. Then Antonio went over
the netiquette guidelines for their time together. He displayed
PowerPoint slides by sharing his screen through Microsoft
Teams for virtual participants, while at the same time,
projected them on the SMART board in the front of the room
for on-site participants.
Participants had been asked to complete pre-class
assignments, which included viewing a video and reading an
article on the topic. Next, Mishika led the large group
discussion about the pre-work video and the pre-assigned
article. She had open-ended discussion questions prepared and

typed in text on a slide. Both in-room and virtual participants
could see her on camera. Some virtual learners seemed less
willing to contribute aloud, so Mishika encouraged them to
share via chat. Seeing several chat comments and questions
come in, she alerted Antonio, who selected some of the key
comments and questions for her to share with the entire group.
Those in the physical room raised their hand when they had
insights they wanted to share aloud. Mishika called on people
both remotely and in-person.
Antonio used the physical whiteboard in the on-site room to
capture their debriefing session, before moving on to group
brainstorming, which virtual learners could see through the
Microsoft Teams platform. When it was time to divide into
small breakouts, the virtual learners were placed into online
breakouts and Antonio divided the in-room participants into
small groups of three people. He requested they spread out
around the room so they could hear each other better. In their
small groups both online and on-site, learners worked together
on a role play, taking turns practicing the skills they had
learned. When it came time to debrief, the in-room participants
had not yet moved back to their original locations and as a
result, some of the remote participants said they could not hear
them as well. So, Antonio asked the in-room participants to
move closer to the ceiling microphones. Antonio always
checked in with virtual learners first when asking a question
and then directed it to an in-room participant. Antonio and
Mishika knew it was best to give online and on-site learners as
equitable a learning experience as possible.
This type of training or instruction has been called “here or
there instruction” (Zydney et al. 2019), hybrid, blended
synchronous 
learning, 
synchronous 
hybrid 
learning,
concurrent classroom, blended programs, hybrid classes, or
co-located learners. What exactly is this type of learning
space? This combination of training brings learners together
from a physical room and online locations. As mentioned
above, some call this hybrid, but hybrid as a term can be
confusing because it’s overused and references a variety of
combinations. In a nutshell, this type of learning is live and

trains in real time with a mix of learners on-site and online. All
are connected and learning together concurrently, regardless of
where they are. I call it live mixed learning.
In chapter 11, we explored how blended learning pairs
asynchronous or self-paced learning with synchronous or live
online learning. These mediums work together to support
synergistic learning. As we discovered, the magic is in the
mix. In this chapter, we explore a different type of blend—live
mixed learning. We’ll examine what it is and how it works, the
workplace context that now calls out for this type of blend and
its advantages, the challenges with this nascent method of
training delivery, considerations for facilitators, and what they
need to be aware of to ensure success. Like chapter 11, this
chapter is not tied to one specific capability, but rather requires
all the capabilities to be successful.
THE BIG IDEA
Determining whether live mixed learning may or
may not be viable depends on your resources for
the requisite technology, staffing co-facilitators, design
flexibility, ability to keep total class size small, and
access to additional IT support.
What Is Live Mixed Learning?
So, what is live mixed learning? Simply stated, it is live
training facilitated in real-time to learners who are online and
on-site (Figure 12-1). Live clearly communicates that this is
not 
asynchronous, 
recorded, 
or 
on-demand. 
Mixed
communicates the combination of both virtual and in-room
participants. In this case, the training allows learners who are
both physically present and virtually present to learn together.
I call this comprehensive approach to training “live mixed
learning” because it calls out for a simple, fresh term that
captures its essence. As Marshall McLuhan’s quotation
references at the beginning of this chapter, electronic media
has brought about the integration of all types of media, and the
former divisions and boundaries are dissolving and blending.

Now that you know what it is, how does it work? Live
mixed learning allows trainers, facilitators, and instructors
who are either virtual or remote to train learners who are both
virtual and remote. The live video stream of the facilitator’s
image can be broadcast to all virtual attendees. Likewise, it’s
better if all in-person attendees can also view remote
participants on live video and vice versa. You would also need
a virtual training platform or video conferencing platform to
connect all participants (such as Zoom, Microsoft Teams,
Webex, Adobe Connect, Blackboard Collaborate, or similar).
The technological platform would facilitate the screen sharing
of materials as well as chat and other interactive tool
functionality.
Figure 12-1. Zoom Live Mixed (Hybrid) Class
The Hybrid Workplace’s Influence on Live
Mixed Learning
Hybrid workplace models are the new normal. Going to work
either means commuting to an office building, working
remotely from anywhere, or some combination of both. Most
employers are leading this charge. In this scenario, an
employee may work from a home office a few times a week
and then come into the office a few times a week or a few

times a month. In the 2021 State of Remote Work, which
surveyed 2,300 employees, 94 percent of workers who started
working remotely due to the pandemic said they wanted to
continue working remotely—at least some of the time—for the
remainder of their careers (Buffer 2021). According to one
2020 research survey, employees on average were interested in
working from home approximately two days each week in the
future (Barrero, Bloom, and Davis 2021). As Matthew
Hollingsworth, head of operations at We Work Remotely, said,
“We now have a workforce who understands that many jobs
can be done from anywhere and will expect their employers to
offer remote-friendly work environments. It is fundamentally
shifting the way we think about work” (Buffer 2021).
Hybrid work is here to stay. Although remote work was
certainly in place long before the COVID-19 pandemic, it
wasn’t until then that it became ubiquitous for health and
safety reasons. Out of necessity, organizations around the
world began to work fully remote for the first time. Other
organizations adapted and offered employees the option to do
a combination of both remote and in person. Although this can
be disrupting, disruption also breeds innovation. As author
Charles Duhigg (2016) points out in Smarter, Faster, Better,
times of disruption are great times for innovation. According
to LinkedIn Learning’s report, workplaces with both remote
employees and employees in the traditional office environment
are “going to be the way we work for the foreseeable future”
(Van Nuys 2021). In fact, according to the 2021 EDUCAUSE
Horizon Report Teaching and Learning Edition, widespread
adoption of these live, mixed types of learning models were
identified as one of the macro trends that will shape the future
of learning in higher education (Pelletier et al. 2021).
Facilitators need to be prepared to provide solutions that
accommodate and embrace both on-site and online learners at
the same time, as the geographical disbursement of their
workforce may permanently require it.
As organizations explore ways to meet the needs of the
hybrid workforce, some employers have redesigned facilities
to accommodate shared, generic workspaces, while still others
allow employees to work from anywhere, like a local coffee

shop or an extended vacation spot. As a result of this shift,
hybrid work has spawned a new challenge for learning and
development and educational practitioners. They are exploring
how to bring together on-site and remote staff and figuring out
what that means for learning and development. Some are on-
site and near company headquarters, while others live out-of-
state or out-of-country. With workers either in-office or off-
site on any given day, how do you manage, coordinate,
schedule, and deliver training to staff? You could provide all
virtual classes for some or all in-person training for others, but
how do you accommodate schedules that vary and conflict
with their co-workers? Hybrid work environments necessitate
different workplace configurations and the need to adopt new
technologies to help reach staff wherever they are. A greater
need for flexibility has emerged so staff can be trained
regardless of where they happen to be on training day.
The core need created by the hybrid workplace model is the
need to be able to train staff from wherever they are. This is
where live mixed learning may be able to offer multiple
benefits that may outweigh the costs. This model of combined
on-site and online learners has been pioneered in higher
educational settings for years. As experienced hybrid educator
Kim Huettl told me, “Learners can attend any class, anywhere,
in any format.” As program manager in the School of
Continuing Education at the University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee, she emphasized that this model can foster
community and connection for those in the classroom, as well
as remote learners, but requires superior and solid technology.
Let’s take a look at some of the other advantages to live mixed
learning.
Advantages of Live Mixed Learning
As you consider whether live mixed learning is viable for you
and your organization, you may be wondering what, if
anything, is the value add. Why not just consider an all in-
person or all-virtual training? Here are some of the advantages
to this approach:
• Fits hybrid workplaces

• Cost savings
• Flexibility and choice
• Global reach and access equity
• In-person dynamics
• Community building among remote and on-site learners
• Wellness and health safety
• Learner expectations of modern training
Fits Hybrid Workplaces
Live mixed learning best supports a hybrid work environment.
In hybrid workplaces, there are some days when staff will be
on-site and other days when they will be remote. Some staff
will prefer the in-person experience on days they are in the
office. Then there are other staff who will always be remote.
Most importantly, it accommodates a hybrid workplace
schedule. If your organization is in a fully hybrid workplace,
live mixed learning may be the best way to accommodate
those who are off-site and on-site.
Cost Savings
Perhaps one of the strongest advantages of the live mixed
learning model is the cost savings. There are significant
savings realized by not flying all employees in for the training
in addition to not having to pay for their hotel
accommodations, rental cars, and other travel-related
expenses. There is also cost savings because of the improved
efficiencies that come with reduced need for physical spaces,
overhead costs like heating and air conditioning of unused
spaces, and fewer rentals of training spaces. As live mixed
learning expert Michael Sitte, director of academic operations
at Milwaukee Area Technical College explained to me, “Over
the years, you’ll get an ROI on it many times over.”
Flexibility and Choice
Another significant benefit is flexibility. Live mixed learning
accommodates learners who want the in-classroom experience,

as well as those who may not be able to attend in person
because of work schedules, where they live, business travel,
being abroad, or even being ill. If you give learners flexibility
based on their needs, locations, and schedules, they’re happier.
This emotional appeal can influence their motivation for the
class, which as we’ve explored previously can influence their
overall learning experience. Live mixed learning also provides
greater flexibility for those who are working in different
locations. Instead of requiring all staff to attend a training in
person when they do not normally work in an office building,
a live mixed class allows them to attend remotely.
Greater learner choice is also more welcome. Live mixed
instructor, Katherine Dalland, a language arts department chair
and humanities teacher, told me she found herself increasing
choice for learners within the classroom. She worked
diligently to “make sure everyone had a voice.”
Global Reach and Access Equity
Another benefit of live mixed learning is its global reach. Void
of geographical limitations, some professionals who may be
across the world or have demanding schedules that do not
allow them to physically attend class can still participate.
Because many organizations have embraced and are operating
as hybrid workplaces, they can now hire more employees who
may live out of state, in other provinces, or another country. In
addition, thanks to technology, you also can leverage
geographical reach for speakers too. If there is an expert on
your training topic on the other side of the world, they can still
be invited and then you would carefully coordinate language
translation as needed and workable times across time zones.
In-Person Dynamics
Some people just want the in-person experience. Period. Think
of when you have gathered with people with whom you have
not been in the same room for a long time. There is
excitement, energy, collaboration, an acute sense of physical
presence, greater sensory stimulation, and comradery and
connection. A live mixed class can anchor a session with a
different dynamic by introducing a sense of the live, in-person

feel. This way, remote participants can also feel like they’re
right there in the room. All the while, remote attendees can be
accommodated as well. Training sessions are anchored in the
naturally occurring high-energy dynamic of when people
gather in person. The live mixed format allows for
collaboration and in-person connection with staff.
Community Building Among Remote and On-Site
Learners
Another benefit is the bridge these classes can forge as
professionals work together. Field staff who are remote or
employees who work out of state, province, or country may
not be as well known. Allowing the two groups to work
together can help build relationships and community between
them.
Wellness and Health Safety
Another advantage to this instructional format is that it allows
for physical distancing to avoid infection transmissions.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, for example, those who
were ill, exposed to others who were infected, or under
quarantine could still attend class virtually. At the same time,
this format still allows for those who prefer the in-room
experience to attend in person.
Learner Expectations of Modern Training
As hybrid workplaces become more commonplace, a greater
number of employees are hired out of state or country.
Because staff are able to work from anywhere, hybrid formats
for some training will become the expectation. To stay
competitive, we need to be open to providing opportunities for
learners to learn both online and on location (Figure 12-2).
There is also a growing need for performance support such as
workflow learning. This is true in higher education, as well as
in private and public workplaces. In the future, spaces for in-
room-only facilitation may become less necessary and less
suitable for a remote and hybrid workforce.

Figure 12-2. Live Mixed Example from KU Leuven
Campus Kulak Kortrijk in Belgium
Challenges With Live Mixed Learning
Before moving ahead with live mixed learning, there are
several challenges to weigh first. Maybe you’ve already heard
from others who have experienced poor learning or it was too
complex or challenging. As technology improves and
facilitators gain more experience with this method, training
with the live mixed learning method will eventually become
easier. For now, let’s examine some of the key challenges:
• Technical issues
• Learning experience inequities
• Facilitator cognitive overload
• Significant time investment
Technical Issues
With more technical complexity comes more technical issues.
As a result, the number-one challenge with live mixed learning
is the greater opportunity for hardware or software technical
issues. One of the most common issues is virtual learners’
inability to hear well. For example, they may not be able to
hear the facilitator (when the facilitator wanders away from a

stationary microphone) or in-room participants when they talk.
At times, when using live mixed learning, you may experience
poor audio quality and delays in video streaming because of
limited bandwidth. There can also be delays getting everything
operational and working as it should. Additionally, when in-
room participants partner with online participants in small,
collaborative groups, other technology issues can emerge.
These technical difficulties create a less-than-optimal
experience for virtual attendees and may frustrate in-person
participants if the training is delayed to fix issues. As one mid-
sized insurance carrier shared with me after their transition to
live mixed training, they needed multiple backup plans for
connections and activities (as we also explored in chapter 9).
From the learner’s perspective, the greater number of
technical issues can be very distracting to the flow of learning.
There can be long lag times if facilitators have to attend to
technical issues that must be resolved before continuing. Lags
in audio can also derail a session and hinder its success.
Because there is so much happening in the learning
environment between all the individualized virtual spaces and
the in-room participants, there are several opportunities for
learners to lose sight of where their focus should be. Any of
these issues could easily disrupt a learning environment or a
learner’s focus.
Learning Experience Inequities
With live mixed learning, you work with two cohorts, each of
whom join class differently. The in-room participants are one
cohort, and the virtual attendees are the other. The challenge is
ensuring that the remote participants do not feel like second-
class citizens. Whenever this blend exists, even in meeting
environments, the virtual attendees—if not on camera—are
often inadvertently forgotten, ignored, or treated as less
important than the in-person participants. If you interview
these individuals, they often admit to feeling overlooked or
left out, as most of the attention is given to those in the
physical room.
I have experienced some facilitators unknowingly focus
solely on the in-person participants, which reduces the virtual

attendees to spectators who then watch the event passively. As
we know, this is not the best way to learn, because optimal
learning is interactive and experiential. From the facilitator’s
perspective, we are trying to create an experience that is
inclusive of both online and on-site participants. In a live
mixed environment, some have also felt a loss of
communication and that the collaborative dynamic is not quite
the same.
Facilitator Cognitive Overload
As we established earlier in the book, virtual training requires
facilitators to manage several cognitive tasks concurrently—
sharing a slide, annotating content and explaining it at the
same time, keeping an eye on chat, and noticing when
someone raises their virtual hand, to name a few. This is
especially taxing for novice facilitators.
When we introduce live mixed learning, the mental load for
preparing and facilitating these classes can be all consuming.
Because instructors can be distracted with many more things
that demand their attention, cognitive overload can become
evident (Bower et al. 2013). Facilitators are still engaged in
the tasks to manage a virtual training environment in addition
to now leading the in-person group. As a live mixed facilitator,
you may glance at your notes to determine what to explain
next on a projected slide, but then, perhaps, a virtual attendee
says they’re not able to see the slide, you lose connection with
your online co-facilitator, and an in-person participant raises
their hand with a question. This can be a lot. Our working
memory has its limits, and just like everything in the natural
world, we can’t do everything all at once. Splitting attention in
so many ways is taxing on the facilitator and can overload
them mentally. As a result, facilitators can become exhausted,
overwhelmed, and ultimately less effective.
At the Ascilite Conference in Sydney, Australia, researchers
presented studies on using this approach and noted how the
instructors said it was challenging to maintain awareness of
both the online groups and the on-site groups (Bower et al.
2013). As one educator put it, “You’ve got a lot of stuff going

on in the background that you either choose to ignore or that
you respond to” (Bower et al. 2013).
As with any task, the more experienced we are at managing
two different cohorts at the same time, the more automated
some of the work can become. The more automated the task,
the less effort required from our working memory and the
more we are freed up to be able to spend our cognitive
resources on other things in the learning environment. We’ll
talk later about some considerations for you to help mitigate
this as you teach live.
Significant Time Investment
Under the status quo, live mixed learning requires much more
investment of time to prepare, coordinate, and test equipment
to ensure all is connected and that all parties can hear and see
correctly. Experts concur that more time is required of
facilitators to ensure everything is working well than when
only facilitating virtual training.
Because of this, we need to creatively manage the cognitive
overload on facilitators, minimize distractions for learners
from online or on-site cohorts, and prepare for the extensive
setup, testing, and rehearsals needed to coordinate all the
moving parts. These steps lend themselves to successful
implementation of live mixed learning.
What can you do to create an optimal experience for both
groups? In the next section, we’ll address some considerations
to address these common challenges to live mixed learning.
Preparation Considerations Before Mixed
Classes Go Live
There are many things to keep in mind as a facilitator prepares
to deliver a live mixed class. These include ensuring the
requisite technology is in place, the technical setup and room
support is ready, planning and preparation has been uniquely
adapted for both locations, and you have communicated you
have clear expectations. Let’s examine them all.

Required Technology
To support a successful live mixed learning environment,
you’ll need specific technology in place. Here are some key
requirements:
• Two in-room cameras
• A wireless microphone for in-room facilitator
• High-quality audio mics and an in-room speaker system
• Virtual training platform or video conferencing platform
• TV displays, large screens, or SMART boards
• Virtual participants’ software and hardware, including
cameras
Two In-Room Cameras
For integrated classroom technology, the in-room cameras
each have different coverage assignments. The first camera
must be able to follow the facilitator as they move around the
room, even though facilitators tend to stay primarily in the
front of the room. This movement can be controlled by a
facilitator with a remote clicker that allows them to move the
camera themselves, or you can purchase a roaming camera
that automatically pans and follows the audio and movement
of whoever is speaking. Roaming cameras can even zoom in
automatically on individuals when the speak. The purpose of
the second camera is to show the in-room participants to
virtual participants. When this camera isn’t there, the virtual
learner can feel left out, or they may be curious about what is
happening in the room because they cannot see anything
except the facilitator. When virtual participants are also on
camera (and can see the room and the on-site participants), it
satisfies their curiosity for what the space and the other
learners look like.
Wireless Microphone for On-Site Facilitator
We look to higher education for their leadership and expertise
in this type of hybrid format. One of their strong
recommendations is to provide a wireless microphone for the

in-room facilitator. Not only does this allow the in-room
facilitator to be more mobile, it also enables the virtual
learners to hear them, regardless of where they are in the
room, which otherwise could be an issue. Avoid using a
laptop’s built-in microphone as this can often cause distortion,
echos, and tinny audio like you’re in a cave. By far, the most
negative comments about this training approach almost always
have to do with poor audio. It’s worth the investment to ensure
the rooms and the facilitators are appropriately amplified with
high-quality audio equipment.
PRO TIP 93
Ensure the in-room facilitator has either a wireless
lavalier microphone or a quality omnidirectional,
in-room mic to facilitate mobility and quality audio.
High-Quality, In-Room Audio System
The most important element for live mixed learning is to work
with your IT department and audio engineers to ensure you
have high quality audio. Employing echo cancellation is also
necessary to curtail sound system feedback. As hybrid expert
Michael J. Sitte recommends, “spend the majority of your
budget resources on the audio.” When video freezes or doesn’t
work as well, the class can still find a way to move forward.
However, poor audio can derail a live mixed class. This cannot
be understated. You must get the audio right.
There are many ways to ensure quality audio. Some
organizations use conference unit systems with built-in
conferencing speakers and microphones to better amplify
spoken audio for virtual learners. Zoom Rooms, for example,
is software-based and allows for audio and video conferencing
for in-room participants. This way, they connect with other
rooms, people at their desktops, or even mobile devices. Zoom
Rooms allows you to select your own hardware, and their
software provides HD video and audio, screen sharing,
annotation, and whiteboarding controlled from a touch screen.
Other organizations have used Poly Studio cameras paired
with omnidirectional microphones (like an Orb microphone) to
pick up audio in any direction.

Michael Sitte shared with me how, in one successful hybrid
setup, he and others installed speakers and six hanging
microphones in the physical training room’s ceiling. It is also
important to clarify with in-room participants that if they have
devices that are logged into the shared video conferencing
platform they need to turn down their audio or make sure their
microphones are turned off; otherwise, this could create a
sound feedback loop.
PRO TIP 94
Prioritize audio technology as your largest
expense and use quality and ease of use as top
criteria for selecting supporting technology.
Video Conferencing Platform, TV Displays, Learner
Hardware and Software
Clearly, you’ll also need a virtual training platform (like
Adobe Connect or Zoom), TV displays or SMART boards to
share visuals with in-person and virtual participants, and
cameras, devices with access to internet, and external
microphones, headsets, or earbuds for virtual participants.
Leverage technology to best meet your needs. Prioritize
audio and then allow ease of use and quality to guide your
purchasing decisions. Some organizations have paired stand-
alone equipment like a Poly Studio Premium USB video bar as
an all-in-one conferencing system or Logitech Rally Bar
conferencing device with motorized cameras and HD zoom,
which serve as the built-in microphone, speaker, and cameras
for the entire room. This way, whoever is attending the
meeting virtually can see all the participants in the physical
training room as well as a floating, smaller window of
themselves, like a picture-in-picture feature. The camera is
smart enough to detect when someone talks and will pan or
zoom in accordingly to the individual speaking. If multiple
people share aloud, the camera knows to zoom out to show all
participants again. There may be a slight second or two delay
for the camera to transition, however it gently pans so it’s not
dizzying to those watching on camera. To project in-room
participants and enable them to see the video and audio of
online participants on any large screen display, ClickShare

Conferencing is a wireless conferencing system that can also
help facilitate the audio and video of live mixed environments.
Setup and Room Support
Technical setup is critical to successful live mixed learning.
The physical room selected is ideally dedicated to support the
mixed format. As Sitte advises, these rooms should be
carpeted, quiet, and away from noisy hallways or traffic
sounds from nearby highways. In your company, government
agency, or educational institution, find rooms that are shielded
from heavy noise. Doing everything you can to ensure quality
audio is paramount.
Setup also means visiting your in-room site and testing all
the equipment to determine if you have all the technology you
need. Test and ensure the audio is always high-quality for all
cohorts regardless of location. Many virtual learners complain
about not being able to adequately hear the facilitator or in-
person attendees when they share aloud. If you are delivering
on-site, have a colleague, IT staff, your producer, or a virtual
co-facilitator be online to test the quality of the audio. Test and
adjust for potential delays on the recipient end. As you move
around the room, ask them to tell you when your sound is no
longer audible or if the quality diminishes. This shows you the
range you need to stay within. This is also true for the camera.
If you use a roaming camera, test it out to learn where in the
room you can go and be seen, and likewise where virtual
learners cannot see you.
Another pioneer educator with the hybrid model is Dean
Stewart, executive director of the Center for Exceptional
Leadership at St. Norbert College’s School of Business and
Economics. As Stewart shared with me, “class setup matters”
for the hybrid type format. When determining how to include
both virtual and in-person attendees in their leadership cohorts
with client organizations, he and other strategic leaders and
educators worked collaboratively to thoughtfully design the
space. “In-person attendees are seated in a U-shaped table in
the traditional, in-person classroom,” explained Stewart.
“Then we use a large 65-inch monitor, which is a Neat Board

and is on wheels, where we project Zoom with virtual
attendees and roll the board in to fill the open space at the end
of the U-shaped table.” Literally, “this way everyone has a seat
at the table.”
Here are some considerations to guide class setup for live
mixed learning. Consider the influence of physical setup.
Subtle classroom setup dynamics influence not only how
participants interact with each other, but also how participants
interact with the facilitator. Just as room layout from
auditorium style versus table groups can make a dramatic
difference on the type of interaction that takes place, this is
also true for hybrid situations. Think about desk placement in
the physical room and camera placement that is the most
inclusive.
PRO TIP 95
Thoughtfully arrange the physical setup by
recognizing its influence on sharing and
discussion within the space.
Planning and Preparation for Live Mixed
Learning
Planning and preparation for the live mixed approach cannot
be understated. It often requires more prep than you would
otherwise experience with other delivery methods. Complete
as much prep work as possible before class day. This might
include placing all handouts and resources on the LMS ahead
of time, setting up breakouts with the activities already listed
on whiteboards, and being crystal clear about any instructions
by also providing these in writing in advance (Bower et al.
2013). Share technical requirements with all virtual attendees
ahead of time.
When looking for feedforward advice in the design phase,
collect input from a learner who will represent the remote
experience and a learner who will represent the in-person
experience. Let’s explore some specific strategies to help
ensure your live mixed class is successful.
Keep Total Class Size Small

It’s best to keep the total number of participants small, to the
tune of 15 or fewer, until you become comfortable with this
format. This is because there is added complexity and more to
manage. The exception to this is if you have a very seasoned,
lead facilitator who can successfully manage a larger class.
Keeping class size smaller is one of the things you have
control over and will help keep your class more manageable
overall.
Try to Meet in Person With Everyone for the First
Class
When you first build a hybrid or remote work team, it may be
the worth the investment to fly everybody in to meet in person.
This can help build those foundational work relationships
when people are in closer proximity. Over time, the teams’
productivity, their ability to work well together, the synergy
and health of the team (contrasted with dysfunction in a team),
earned trust, and cohesive bonding can all stem from initial
relationship building. However, clearly this may not be
feasible with extenuating circumstances like a pandemic or
budget limitations.
The same can also be said for robust training programs
where learners will be learning together over multiple weeks
or months. As Dean Stewart explained, his live mixed
leadership classes invite all participants to attend the first class
in person. This helps place everyone on even footing. He said
this format works extremely well because the core
relationships first established in person then carry through the
entirety of the program.
Allow Learners to Choose Their Primary Location
Venue
One of the advantages of this format is its flexibility. Give
learners the option to be in-person or virtual. This gives them
the freedom to opt in, and the autonomy empowers them.
However, if they are in-person one day and virtual the next, it
can create more complexity and technical surprises. For this
reason, they should choose how they will join for the duration
of the program and commit to that format. To make the live

mixed training worth your time, set a minimum expectation
for how many on-site attendees you’ll need. For example, if
only one or two learners choose to be on-site, you need to
determine whether it is worth the investment or if the class
would be better served as all virtual.
PRO TIP 96
Allow learners to choose whether to attend the
training program virtually or in person to honor
their preferences and accommodate their schedules.
Establish Clear Expectations
Setting clear expectations prior to the live online learning
event is always a best practice, even with live mixed learning.
Request online participants log in at least 10 minutes early to
every class. In both your pre-session messaging and at the
beginning of the session, encourage all learners to turn off
mobile phones, find a quiet environment, let colleagues around
them know they’re in training, and minimize learning
distractions in their own environments for the sake of
themselves and others. Additionally, be crystal clear on your
instructions for any activities. If you ask a volunteer learner to
paraphrase back your instructions, this gives you an
opportunity to clarify any gaps between what was said and
what was heard. When training across time zones, reference
the time zone most common to virtual participants as well as
the time zone where the physical class is being held. This
helps convert and call attention to their time. For example, you
might say, “We’ll take a 10 minute break. For those of you on-
site, it’s 1 p.m. Pacific; we’ll see you back here at 1:10 p.m.
For those of you on Eastern time, we’ll see you at 4:10 p.m.
Have a good break!” This adds a customized touch and
reminds them you recognize where they are.
Considerations for Successful Facilitation
During Live Mixed Classes
We’ve explored preparatory considerations before going live,
now let’s turn our attention to how to best facilitate during
class. There are several strategies you can follow to contribute

to the success of your live mixed sessions. They include using
co-facilitators, partnering with IT, sharing netiquette, building
interconnection, using the same learning activities regardless
of learner location, and countering implicit in-room bias.
Use Co-Facilitators
For larger classes, it’s best to use co-facilitators and position
one facilitator remotely and one in the physical room. Select
one person to be the lead facilitator, particularly an
experienced facilitator for both in-person and virtual. This
individual could lead the class from either location. Sourcing
facilitators in both locations helps learners feel supported,
knowing that there’s a leader in the space that they’re also in.
This also provides a spokesperson to speak on their behalf as
needed, troubleshoot issues, or respond to their questions. This
way, the mental load and duties are shared among co-
facilitators, which makes it more manageable.
This is also a way to reduce the high cognitive load
associated with teaching a live mixed class by sharing the
facilitator role, along with also having IT on board to help
produce the event. When there are multiple instructors,
learners get different perspectives and more variety. This can
also aid the dynamic engagement discussed in chapter 8 and
can also provide a richer experience overall, especially in
terms of the social and emotional dimensions of learning.
Keep in mind that based on how many learners there are in the
class, the number of facilitators assisting can be appropriately
scaled.
There can be variations of live mixed as well. For one of my
clients, I was the lead facilitator virtually connecting from the
US Midwest. My client was on the East Coast and everyone
was on-site together in the same room. They could all see me
virtually on a big screen in their room. I requested a client
contact be the facilitator to serve as my eyes and ears in the
room. I relied on this individual to be the point person for
sharing learner comments and encouraging their interactions,
which worked very well.
PRO TIP 97

Use co-facilitators with live mixed classes and
designate a lead facilitator (either on-site or
online). Place the other co-facilitator in the
alternate location.
Partner With IT Technicians or Arrange for On-
Call Technical Support
When things go wrong in the live mixed class, there usually
isn’t time to fix them. As discussed earlier, longer lag times
can distract and interrupt the flow of learning. For this reason,
immediate online support is essential to prevent derailing
distractions and frustrating learning experiences. Here are
some of the ways mixed learning pioneers have found success.
One option is to partner with IT or a technical specialist.
Speak with your IT department to see if they can dedicate staff
to specifically support the live mixed learning rooms. They
may also attend to other technical support issues for the
organization, but having dedicated IT staff can help resolve
any issues immediately. Partnering with IT also provides
learners with a responsive and credible IT hotline to help them
quickly address and resolve technical issues with the
connection or platform (Boyarsky 2020).
If possible, request an IT specialist be available for tech
rehearsals and at the beginning of the session to troubleshoot
any issues as needed. Better yet, invite them to attend remotely
for the duration. Seasoned hybrid instructor Michael Sitte
recommends having an IT staff person attend as a remote
participant who stays on for the entire class to assist with any
technical difficulties. This way they are right there and always
ready to help resolve any issue.
If you have a tech-savvy facilitator, they could also serve as
a technical producer. For your initial classes, especially those
that span over time for a virtual program, invite IT to be
present to assist with technology challenges. Alternatively,
equip your co-facilitators to be technically savvy to
troubleshoot as needed.
PRO TIP 98

Invite an IT technician to be present for tech
checks before class day, attend class virtually to
address issues, or be accessible on call.
Establish Netiquette Guidelines for Live Mixed
Class
Part of the educational piece for the virtual learner is knowing
when and how to communicate. To set them up for success, tee
up learners with pre-class communications from both the LMS
and the facilitators to clarify exactly what hardware, software,
and equipment they need for a successful class and to optimize
their experience and manage expectations about what they’ll
do and why they’re doing it.
In addition to setting expectations ahead of time via pre-
session communications, you also want to establish them very
clearly up-front during the session. One of the best ways to
establish expectations is to communicate them through
netiquette. For example, encourage participants to take
initiative and speak up if they cannot hear well, avoid in-room
side conversations, mute themselves when not speaking
online, and use a headset if remote. As experienced live mixed
instructor Kim Huettl shared with me, “Etiquette is really
important for hybrid.”
Another netiquette guideline you might consider adding is a
recommendation that emerged out of seven case studies from
educators in New Zealand and Australia. Request all learners
type “Q” first in chat before typing a question. This way
facilitators can quickly scan, identify, and respond to the
posted questions (Bower et al. 2013).
PRO TIP 99
Clarify netiquette guidelines relevant to live mixed
interactions for all in-person and virtual learners.
Build in Opportunities for Interconnection and
Collaboration Among the Two Cohorts
To build a hybrid learning culture at an organization, be on the
lookout for opportunities where the two groups can interact

with each other. For example, during group discussions, on-
site learners can play off comments from virtual learners and
vice versa. Leveraging paired learning is another example.
Some organizations have found success creating a partnership
between a remote learner and an in-room participant so that
they have the opportunity for paired chat. They would need
time, of course, to meet, greet, and connect with an opening
activity to build that relationship pairing early on in class. The
prerequisite is that in-room participants would also need their
laptops or mobile phones for some class activities. The online
and on-site partnership allows them to communicate and ask
questions more comfortably among themselves because a
pairing is less intimidating than raising a question or comment
to the group at large. For example, if a virtual learner missed
where the assignment was posted, they could chat with their
partner about where it is rather than asking the facilitator. This
creates a support system for the virtual attendees, who can
sometimes feel slightly at a disadvantage compared with those
attending in person.
To build an environment that encourages community and a
unified class, language can also provide cues. Be sure to
model by actions and your language that “it’s not an ‘us and
them’ mentality … but instead a ‘we’ dynamic” (Finegan
2021).
Use the Same Learning Activities for All
Participants do better when you weave uniform experiences in
regardless of whether they’re in person or virtual. Work to
ensure learning activities can be completed by both regardless
of location. Level the playing field for all as much as you can.
To maintain a similar experience for both in-person and
virtual participants, use a SMART Board that all can see in-
room and is also projected online. When you use a poll, ensure
all can access it digitally to vote. When you ask them to chat,
allow all to use the online chat if they wish. Allow for slight
variances as needed, while ensuring an equitable experience.
For both cohorts, you can leverage Q&A, rich group

discussions, 
rotating 
presentations, 
feedback, 
group
brainstorming, and small-group work.
Applying what we learned in chapter 2 about live mixed
learning, gather perspectives from a few real virtual learners
and in-room learners to inform the overall design. Designers
needs to think carefully about which exercises can be done
well in the classroom, and how to convert them so they are
suitable for the virtual platform as well. For example, it’s best
to use the same medium for brainstorming and documenting
ideas. Use online whiteboards to document for all to see. Be
flexible. Another example of a learning activity designed to
suit both audiences would be posing a discussion question for
all to contribute to verbally, or assigning a challenging
scenario for them to solve in their small breakout groups.
Breakouts
Higher education has been a leader in hybrid breakout
activities as they have adopted best practices working with
both on-site and online learners for years. Michael Sitte and
his colleagues discovered it worked best to divide in-person
attendees into small discussion groups within the physical
room, while virtual attendees were divided into virtual
breakout rooms. This way, there was less complication with
technology issues and there wasn’t a lot of talking over each
other. The downside to this is that virtual will be working with
the same group all the time, and they often feel slightly
disadvantaged because they don’t have eyes and ears in the
room.
Experienced instructor Katherine Dalland mixes remote
learners with in-person learners during breakouts so remote
learners don’t feel like a separate learning group. To make this
feasible, she sends in-room learners into other areas (extending
outside the original classroom as needed) and makes sure all
are connected with their own headsets and laptops.
Whiteboarding
For collaborative whiteboarding, make sure all can participate
equally on a shared whiteboard. For example, if you have a

Zoom Room, all participants should be able to see the
whiteboarding completed in-room and online. If you are using
an in-room SMART Board, you can annotate on the
whiteboard, which will then be displayed to virtual learners.
Alternatively, in-room participants with laptops can contribute
to the same whiteboard tool virtual participants use through
the video conferencing platform.
Counter In-Room Implicit Bias
Without realizing it, we can demonstrate a preference for one
group over another—typically the in-person cohort—without
conscious knowledge. Be aware that facilitators can
unknowingly attend more to in-person learners when they are
also in person. This doesn’t seem to be the case when a lead
facilitator is virtual. In my experience, when I’ve been the lead
facilitator virtually and had another facilitator at the on-site
location, we were all able to equally participate. The on-site
facilitator was the point person for on-site participants. As a
counter strategy, cater to the virtual first, and then rotate back
and forth.
If you include round robins, icebreakers, or question
prompts, call on virtual attendees first. As this is the group
most often forgotten (especially when they are not onscreen),
disciplining yourself to always ask a remote learner first will
help you be inclusive.
PRO TIP 100
Maintain an equitable experience in learning
activities regardless of whether participants are
remote or on-site.
Additional Considerations
As you weigh whether live mixed learning is viable for you or
your organization, here are some additional considerations to
help with your decision, approach, design, preparation, and
implementation. Many lessons are pulled from higher
education, as they more broadly apply this method. Lessons
can also be drawn from corporate hybrid meetings, which also
showcase the live mixed environment.

Train Facilitators for Live Mixed Format
One tip is to offer workshops and drop-in rehearsals so
facilitators can learn how to use the equipment, IT support
resources, and other considerations for being successful live
mixed facilitators. Michael Sitte encourages new adopters to
approach the process with patience, test it out first, and do
their best to avoid getting frustrated. He recommends offering
training for instructors ahead of time by beginning with early
adopters. From there, mentor and coach others to use the new
mixed approach to learning and continue to share best
practices for the community of facilitators who use the space.
Selecting facilitators to lead live mixed classes who
demonstrate competence in all the capabilities discussed in
this book is ideal. These facilitators possess the knowledge
and skills in the areas of experience design, environment
shaping, online facilitation, facilitator presence, technical
fluency, dynamic engagement, agile troubleshooting, and
evaluating impact. The instructor’s capabilities have been
found in several studies to be one of the critical factors of
success for live mixed sessions and their respective activities
(Bower et al. 2013).
Record Sessions
Researchers have also discovered that recording sessions is
important for live mixed learning. This is a way to capture all
the combined interactions of the mixed learning experiences,
which learners can reference later (Bower et al. 2013).
So far in the live mixed format, we’ve discussed two learner
groups (your on-site and your online learners). However, if
you plan to record your sessions, you also have a third
audience: the on-demand, asynchronous learners. This is
important because during your live sessions, you should also
occasionally refer to this third group to customize it to them as
well. For example, if I know that my live mixed class will be
recorded and made available for asynchronous learners to
view on demand, while I’m training I might say, “Welcome to
those of you joining us online, in the room, and to those of you
watching this recording” or “for those of you watching the

recording, go ahead and do this exercise with us too.” This
way you grab the attention of all your learner groups and
speak directly to them.
In a similar vein, as lead facilitator, I try to always make
sure I am cognizant of being inclusive by describing what each
group cannot see. This is imperative if learners are listening to
audio playback while driving or perhaps don’t have access to
the video portion. This is similar to the prescriptive tip covered
in chapter 4 about making the invisible audible. For example,
if the camera that displays in-room participants is off or
unavailable, virtual learners cannot see in-room learners. If
this happens, I make a mental note to verbalize what they
cannot see. In a leadership class, let’s say I ask on-site learners
to raise their hands if they’ve been a manager before. In-room
learners would physically raise their hands and virtual learners
would normally raise their hands using the platform’s hand-
raising prompts. If I know virtual learners cannot see their on-
site peers, I might say “for those of you online, about 75
percent of the 12 of us here in the room just raised their hands,
and it looks like all raised their virtual hands online.” This way
everyone feels included and part of the action.
Improve by Evaluating and Collecting Learner
Feedback
In chapter 10, we learned the importance of evaluating the
effectiveness of the training solutions you deliver. Be open to
collecting feedback from both online and on-site learners to
best determine how to improve your offering. Remember,
some of the best ideas come directly from your learners. Apply
the evaluating impact capability to evaluate the impact the
program is having on your organization as well as the
application, learning, and reaction of learners.
Deliver Live Mixed as a Blended Learning
Program
As discussed in the previous chapter, blended learning
solutions combine the best of both worlds. As we turn our
focus to live mixed learning, we can optimize the benefits of

this approach by designing blended learning programs. As
Kim Huettl shared with me, you really want to maximize the
time you’re together in the hybrid environment for activities
that lend themselves to being together. For example, peer
feedback can be shared asynchronously so that synchronous
class time can be devoted to collaborative-type activities. In
live mixed, you can include “collaborative evaluation, group
questioning, joint problem solving, role-play, whole-class
discussions, and collaborative design tasks” (Bower et al.
2013). “By bringing together the two contexts and continuing
to utilize the opportunities that remote learning has to offer—
asynchronous learning, self-paced lessons, personalized
pathways, additional one-on-one touch points—we can help
students to continue to learn and grow together, as one class,
no matter where they are physically” (Finegan 2021). Online
exercises like viewing videos as supporting learning activities,
for example, combine the benefits of in-person and virtual
learning while providing access for all regardless of where
they’re located (Boyarsky 2020).
PRO TIP 101
Leverage the benefits of blended learning by
coupling asynchronous assignments with
synchronous, live mixed learning.
Summary
Successful live mixed learning requires first and foremost,
high-quality audio, supporting hardware and software
technologies, 
extensive 
preparation, 
equitable 
learning
activities, and skilled co-facilitators. This chapter outlined a
variety of considerations for you and your organization so you
can weigh whether live mixed learning is viable. We’ve
explored what live mixed is, its advantages and challenges,
and considerations before going live while facilitating.
We are currently in the middle of accelerated development
in this area. Ease of use and quality should remain guiding
criteria as you purchase technologies to support live mixed
learning. As the modern workforce continues to adopt hybrid
and remote work models, more organizations will use this

delivery approach. As they do, the service technology will
improve and perhaps one day the divisions between on-site
and 
online 
will 
feel 
more 
united. 
More 
research,
experimentation, observation, and best practices are still
needed for this instructional approach.
Whether live mixed learning is appropriate for your
organization depends on whether you have the supporting
technology, need the location flexibility for your learners, have
the ability to source multiple skilled facilitators, can provide
design flexibility, are training topics that do not need to be
hands on, can offer smaller class sizes, and have access to
additional IT support. Although this solution may not be
recommended for every virtual training class, do reflect on
whether adopting live mixed learning makes sense for some of
your training topics and programs. It may yet be another
opportunity for training improvement. As Dean Stewart put it,
we should explore what this venue opens up in terms of
possibilities that could work even better.
As we embrace a global hybrid workforce, let’s keep several
things in mind. First, recognize that virtual training is here to
stay. We know virtual learning can be effective across time,
space, and distance. The need to upskill has never been
greater. Second, remember that the eight core virtual trainer
capabilities are meant to guide your development and your
craft. The Virtual Trainer Capability Model provides a
framework to help build your skills and advance the
profession. Third, there is a plethora of knowledge and tips
outlined for you in this book. Take the opportunity to digest,
experiment, and reflect on each of the tips in the chapter
summaries.
Because we are in a profession that helps others develop
new knowledge and skills, my hope is that this book has
helped you develop new knowledge and skills too. It is
because you invest in others that this book has invested in you.
As we rise to the challenge, let’s set the bar high by pushing
ourselves to be better virtual trainers and online facilitators.
Why? Because worldwide learners and future generations

deserve our best. Together we make an investment in the most
precious commodity we have—the global workforce.
Ultimately, remember that as we eventually reach full
competence in experience design, environment shaping, online
facilitation, facilitator presence, technical fluency, dynamic
engagement, agile troubleshooting, and evaluating impact, all
of these interconnected capabilities will help us take our
virtual training to the next level. I wish you continued success
as you upskill, reskill, and innovate. I’m excited to see what
you’ll do next! Now let’s go transform the L&D world … one
virtual training program at a time.
Pro Tips for Training With Live
Mixed Learning
TIP
93
Ensure the in-room facilitator has either a wireless lavalier
microphone or a quality omnidirectional, in-room mic to
facilitate mobility and quality audio.
TIP
94
Prioritize audio technology as your largest expense and use
quality and ease of use as top criteria for selecting supporting
technology.
TIP
95
Thoughtfully arrange the physical setup by recognizing its
influence on sharing and discussion within the space.
TIP
96
Allow learners to choose whether to attend the training
program virtually or in person to honor their preferences and
accommodate their schedules.
TIP
97
Use co-facilitators with live mixed classes and designate a
lead facilitator (either on-site or online) and place the other co-
facilitator in the alternate location.
TIP
98
Invite an IT technician to be present for tech checks before
class day, attend class virtually to address issues, or be
accessible on call.
TIP
99
Clarify netiquette guidelines relevant to live mixed interactions
for all in-person and virtual learners.

TIP
100
Maintain an equitable experience in learning activities
regardless of whether participants are remote or on-site.
TIP
101
Leverage the benefits of blended learning by coupling
asynchronous assignments with synchronous, live mixed
learning.

References
Allen, M.W. 2007. Designing Successful E-Learning: Forget
What You Know About Instructional Design and Do
Something Interesting. San Francisco: Pfeiffer.
Allen, M.W. 2012. Leaving ADDIE for SAM: An Agile Model
for Developing the Best Learning Experiences. Alexandria,
VA: ATD Press.
Allen, M.W., J. Dirksen, C. Quinn, and W. Thalheimer. 2014.
“A Serious E-Learning Manifesto.” Chapter 22 in ASTD
Handbook: The Definitive Reference for Training and
Development, edited by E. Biech. Alexandria, VA: ATD
Press.
Anderson, J., L. Rainie, and E.A. Vogels. 2021. “Experts Say
the ‘New Normal’ in 2025 Will Be Far More Tech-Driven,
Presenting More Big Challenges.” Pew Research Center,
February 18. pewresearch.org/internet/2021/02/18/experts-
say-the-new-normal-in-2025-will-be-far-more-tech-driven-
presenting-more-big-challenges.
Andreatta, B. 2018. Wired To Connect: The Brain Science of
Teams and a New Model for Creating Collaboration and
Inclusion. Santa Barbara, CA: 7th Mind Publishing.
APA (American Psychological Association). 2020.
“Habituation.” APA Dictionary of Psychology.
dictionary.apa.org/habituation.
Aristotle. 1954. The Rhetoric and The Poetics of Aristotle.
Translated by W. Rhys Roberts and I. Bywater. New York:
Random House.
ATD (Association for Talent Development). 2020. 2020 State
of the Industry: Talent Development Benchmarks and
Trends. Alexandria, VA: ATD.

ATD (Association for Talent Development). 2021. Virtual
Classrooms: Leveraging Technology for Impact.
Alexandria, VA: ATD Press.
Atkinson, C., and R.E. Mayer. 2004. “Five Ways to Reduce
PowerPoint Overload.” Creative Commons 1(1): 1–15.
Barrero, J.M., N. Bloom, and S.J. Davis. 2021. Why Working
From Home Will Stick. Working paper no. 28731.
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Berrett, D. 2015. “How Flipping the Classroom Can Improve
the Traditional Lecture.” In A Guide to the Flipped
Classroom. Washington, DC: Chronicle of Higher
Education.
Bersin, J. 2020. “A Framework for Optimizing the Virtual
Live Learning Experience.” Whitepaper, Adobe Connect,
2–4. adobe.com/content/dam/cc/us/en/products/adobe-
connect/resources/framework_for_optimizing_live_virtual_l
earning_experience_whitepaper_2020.pdf.
Biech, E. 2017. The Art and Science of Training. Alexandria,
VA: ATD Press.
Bloom, B.S., M.D. Englehart, E.J. Furst, W.H. Hill, and D.R.
Krathwohl. 1956. Taxonomy of Educational Objectives: The
Classification of Educational Goals, Handbook 1: The
Cognitive Domain. New York: David McKay Co.
Boller, S., and L. Fletcher. 2020. Design Thinking for Training
and Development: Creating Learning Journeys That Get
Results. Alexandria, VA: ATD Press.
Bower, M., J. Kenney, B. Dalgarno, M.J.W. Lee, and G.E.
Kennedy. 2013. “Blended Synchronous Learning: Patterns
and Principles for Simultaneously Engaging Co-Located
and Distributed Learners.” Presented at the 30th Ascilite
Conference at Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia,
December 1–4, 92–101.
Boyarsky, K. 2020. “What Is Hybrid Learning? Here’s
Everything You Need to Know.” OWL LABS, June.
resources.owllabs.com/blog/hybrid-learning.

Bozarth, J. 2016a. “Nuts and Bolts: How to Rock Your Virtual
Classroom with Participant Chat.” Learning Solutions, May
3. learningsolutionsmag.com/articles/1953/nuts-and-bolts-
how-to-rock-your-virtual-classroom-with-participant-chat.
Bozarth, J. 2016b. “Nuts and Bolts: Rocking the Virtual
Classroom—What About That Whiteboard?” Learning
Solutions, April 5.
learningsolutionsmag.com/articles/1938/nuts-and-bolts-
rocking-the-virtual-classroomwhat-about-that-whiteboard.
Bozarth, J. 2020. Less Content, More Learner: An Overview of
Learning Experience Design. The Learning Guild, May 13.
learningguild.com/insights/250/less-content-more-learner-
an-overview-of-learning-experience-design.
Buffer. 2021. “The 2021 State of Remote Work: Top Insights
and Data from One of the Largest Remote Work Reports.”
Buffer. buffer.com/2021-state-of-remote-work.
Bundy, C.B., and L. Howles. 2017. “Interactive Case
Scenarios: The 7 Cs Framework,” Educause, October 23.
library.educause.edu/resources/2017/10/interactive-case-
scenarios-the-7cs-framework.
Burnison, G. 2019. “7 Years Ago, Google Set Out to Find
What Makes the ‘Perfect’ Team—and What They Found
Shocked Other Researchers.” CNBC, February 28.
cnbc.com/2019/02/28/what-google-learned-in-its-quest-to-
build-the-perfect-team.html.
Christensen, C.M., T. Hall, K. Dillon, and D.S. Duncan. 2016.
Competing Against Luck: The Story of Innovation and
Customer Choice. New York: Harper Business.
Christopher, D. 2011. “Facilitating in the Global Virtual
Classroom.” InfoLine. Alexandria, VA: ASTD Press.
Christopher, D. 2015. The Successful Virtual Classroom: How
to Design and Facilitate Interactive and Engaging Live
Online Learning. New York: AMACOM.
Clark, R.E., and J. Elen. 2006. “When Less is More: Research
and Theory Insights about Instruction for Complex
Learning.” Handling Complexity in Learning Environments:

Research and Theory. Bingley, UK: Emerald Group
Publishing.
Clark, R.C. 2020. Evidence-Based Training Methods: A Guide
for Training Professionals, 3rd ed. Alexandria, VA: ATD
Press.
Clark, R.C., and A. Kwinn. 2007. The New Virtual Classroom:
Evidence-Based Guidelines for Synchronous e-Learning.
San Francisco: John Wiley & Sons.
Clark, R.C., F. Nguyen, and J. Sweller. 2006. Efficiency in
Learning: Evidence-Based Guidelines to Manage Cognitive
Load. San Francisco: John Wiley & Sons.
Conceição, S.C.O., and L.L. Howles. 2021. Designing the
Online Learning Experience: Evidence-Based Principles
and Strategies. Sterling, VA: Stylus Publishing.
Cross, J. 2007. “What Is Informal Learning?” Informal
Learning, November 27.
Cuddy, A. 2015. Presence: Bringing your Boldest Self to your
Biggest Challenges. New York: Little, Brown Spark.
D’Mello, S., B. Lehman, R. Pekrun, and A. Graesser. 2014.
“Confusion can be Beneficial for Learning.” Learning and
Instruction 29:153–170.
Dennen, V.P., K.D. Word, and Ö. Arslan. 2021. “Webcams at
Work: A Survey of Learning Professionals’ Practices and
Perceptions.” Research Brief, Instructional Systems &
Learning Technologies, Florida State University.
purl.flvc.org/fsu/fd/FSU_libsubv1_scholarship_submission_
1621457890_5284fd79.
Di Vesta, F.J., and D.A. Smith. 1979. “The Pausing Principle:
Increasing the Efficiency of Memory for Ongoing Events.”
Contemporary Educational Psychology 4(3): 288–296.
Dirksen, J. 2012. Design for How People Learn. Berkeley,
CA: New Riders.
DiSalvo, B., J. Yip, E. Bonsignore, and C. DiSalvo, eds. 2017.
Participatory Design for Learning: Perspectives from
Research and Practice. New York: Routledge.

Douglas, J., and S. McKenzie. 2016. Let Them Choose:
Cafeteria Learning Style for Adults. Alexandria, VA: ATD
Press.
Draves, W.A. 2000. Teaching Online. River Falls, WI: LERN
Books.
Duarte, N. 2008. Slide:ology: The Art and Science of Creating
Great Presentations. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media.
Duhigg, C. 2016. Smarter Faster Better: The Transformative
Power of Real Productivity. New York: Random House.
Edmondson, A. 2019. The Fearless Organization: Creating
Psychological Safety in the Workplace for Learning,
Innovation, and Growth. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Edmondson, A. 2020. “Fearless—Creating Psychological
Safety for Learning, Innovation, and Growth.” The AAMC
Annual Meeting, April 30. youtube.com/watch?
v=_1Ub1xfSQ1s.
Edmondson, A.C., and G. Daley. 2020. “How to Foster
Psychological Safety in Virtual Meetings.” Harvard
Business Review, August 25. hbr.org/2020/08/how-to-foster-
psychological-safety-in-virtual-meetings.
Elkeles, T., P.P. Phillips, and J.J. Phillips. 2014. Measuring the
Success of Learning Through Technology. Alexandria, VA:
ATD Press.
Finegan, J. 2021. “5 Keys to Success in Hybrid Learning,”
Edutopia, May 12. edutopia.org/article/5-keys-success-
hybrid-learning.
Finn, B. 2010. “Ending on a High Note: Adding a Better End
to Effortful Study.” Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition 36(6): 1548.
Fusco, J., P. Ruiz, and J. Roschelle. 2021. “AI or Intelligence
Augmentation for Education?” Communications of the
ACM, July (12). cacm.acm.org/blogs/blog-cacm/251188-ai-
or-intelligence-augmentation-for-education/fulltext.
Google. 2018. “Google Duplex: AI Assistant Calls Local
Businesses to Make Appointments.” Sundar Pichai

presentation, May 8. youtube.com/watch?
v=D5VN56jQMWM.
Hofmann, J. 2004. Live and Online!: Tips, Techniques, and
Ready-to-Use Activities for the Virtual Classroom. San
Francisco: Pfeiffer.
Hofmann, J. 2019. The Modern Virtual Classroom Experience.
Book 1: Facilitating the Experience: Developing
Competence and Creating Engagement. Portsmouth, NH:
InSync Training.
Horn, R.E., E.H. Nicol, J.C. Kleinman, and M.G. Grace. 1969.
Information Mapping for Learning and Reference.
Cambridge, MA: Information Resources.
Horton, W. 2006. E-Learning by Design. San Francisco: John
Wiley & Sons.
Horton, W. 2012. E-Learning by Design, 2nd ed. San
Francisco: John Wiley & Sons.
Horwath, A. 2021. “Tailor-Made Evaluation.” TD, April.
td.org/magazines/td-magazine/tailor-made-evaluation.
Howles, D.L. 2015. “Design Tips for Flipping the Virtual
Classroom.” Learning Solutions, June.
learningsolutionsmag.com/articles/1721/design-tips-for-
flipping-the-virtual-classroom.
Howles, D.L. 2020. “Making the Shift to Virtual Training.”
Learning Solutions, May.
learningsolutionsmag.com/articles/making-the-shift-to-
virtual-training.
Howles, L. 2020. “Interview With Dr. Janet Zadina: Applying
Educational Neuroscience Research to Instruction and
elearning.” eLearn 2020(5).
Hubbard, D.W. 2010. How to Measure Anything: Finding the
Value of Intangibles in Business, 2nd ed. Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons.
Huggett, C. 2017. Virtual Training Tools and Templates: An
Action Guide to Live Online Learning, Alexandria, VA:
ATD Press.

Huggett, C. 2020. “The State of Virtual Training 2020.” Cindy
Huggett Blog, October 16.
cindyhuggett.com/blog/2020sovt.
Immersive Learning News. 2020. “Understanding the
Neuroscience of Learning.” Immersive Learning News,
March 14. immersivelearning.news/2020/03/14/learning-is-
an-experience-everything-else-is-just
-information-albert-einstein.
Interaction Design Foundation. 2021. “Design Thinking.”
interaction-design.org.
Jiang, M. 2020. “The Reason Zoom Calls Drain your Energy.”
Remote Control blog, April 22.
bbc.com/worklife/article/20200421-why-zoom-video-chats-
are-so-exhausting.
Kahneman, D., B.L. Fredrickson, C.A. Schreiber, and D.A.
Redelmeier. 1993. “When More Pain Is Preferred to Less:
Adding a Better End.” Psychological Science 4(6): 401–
405.
Kane, P. 2021. “The Great Resignation Is Here, and It’s Real.”
Inc., August 26. inc.com/phillip-kane/the-great-resignation-
is-here-its-real.html.
Kang, S.H.K., K.B. McDermott, and H.L. Roediger III. 2007.
“Test Format and Corrective Feedback Modify the Effect of
Testing on Long-term Retention.” European Journal of
Cognitive Psychology 19(4–5): 528–558.
Kapp, K.M., L. Blair, and R. Mesch. 2014. The Gamification
of Learning and Instruction Fieldbook: Ideas Into Practice.
San Francisco: John Wiley & Sons.
Keller, J.M. 2009. Motivational Design for Learning and
Performance: The ARCS Model Approach. New York:
Springer Science & Business Media.
Kirkpatrick, D.L. 1956. “How to Start an Objective Evaluation
of your Training Program.” Journal of the American Society
of Training Directors 10:18–22.
Kirkpatrick, D.L. 1996. Evaluating Training Programs: The
Four Levels. Oakland, CA: Berrett-Koehler Publishers.

Kirkpatrick, D.L., and J.D. Kirkpatrick. 2006. Evaluating
Training Programs: The Four Levels, 3rd ed. Oakland, CA:
Berrett-Koehler Publishers.
Kirkpatrick Partners. 2021. “The Kirkpatrick Model.”
Kirkpatrick Partners. kirkpatrickpartners.com/the-
kirkpatrick-model.
Kizilcec, R.F., J.N. Bailenson, and C.J. Gomez. 2015. “The
Instructor’s Face in Video Instruction: Evidence from Two
Large-scale Field Studies.” Journal of Educational
Psychology 107(3): 724–739.
Kotb, H. 2021. “Jade Carey Talks About Winning Gold Medal
in Floor Exercise.” Today Show, August 2.
today.com/video/jade-carey-talks-about-winning-gold-
medal-in-floor-exercise-117751365509.
Krulwich, R. 2011. “A (Shockingly) Short History of Hello.”
NPR Wisconsin Public Radio, February 17.
npr.org/sections/krulwich/2011/02/17/133785829/a-
shockingly-short-history-of-hello.
LaBorie, K. 2021. Producing Virtual Training, Meetings, and
Webinars: Master the Technology to Engage Participants.
Alexandria, VA: ATD Press.
LibQuotes. 2021. “Isaac Newton Quote.” libquotes.com/isaac-
newton/quote/lbk9b1x.
Liedtke, M. 2021. “Zoom’s Boom Continues in 1Q, Raising
Post-Pandemic Hopes.” US News & World Report, June 1.
usnews.com/news/business/articles/2021-06-01/zooms-
boom-continues-in-1q-raising-post-pandemic-hopes.
MacLeod, E. 1999. Alexander Graham Bell: An Inventive Life.
Toronto: Kids Can Press.
Masie, E. 2021. “My Post-Pandemic Learning List.” Chief
Learning Officer Magazine, June 4.
MasterClass. 2021. “How to Recognize the 5 Stages of Group
Development.” MasterClass Business.
masterclass.com/articles/how-to-recognize-the-5-stages-of-
group-development.

Mayer, R.E. 2014. “Principles Based on Social Cues in
Multimedia Learning: Personalization, Voice, Image, and
Embodiment Principles.” In The Cambridge Handbook of
Multimedia Learning, edited by Richard E. Mayer. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Mayer, R.E., and L. Fiorella. 2014. “Principles for Reducing
Extraneous Processing in Multimedia Learning: Coherence,
Signaling, Redundancy, Spatial Contiguity, and Temporal
Contiguity Principles.” In The Cambridge Handbook of
Multimedia Learning, edited by Richard E. Mayer. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Mayer, R.E., and R. Moreno. 2003. “Nine Ways to Reduce
Cognitive Load in Multimedia Learning.” Educational
Psychologist 38(1): 43-52.
McLuhan, M. 1964. Understanding Media: The Extensions of
Man. New York: McGraw-Hill.
McLuhan, M., and B. Nevitt. 1972. TAKE TODAY: The
Executive as Dropout. New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich.
Means, B., Y. Toyama, R. Murphy, M. Bakia, and K. Jones.
2009. “Evaluation of Evidence-based Practices in Online
Learning: A Meta-analysis and Review of Online Learning
Studies.” Washington, DC: US Department of Education,
Office of Planning, Evaluation, and Policy Development.
Merrill, M.D. 2017. “Using the First Principles of Instruction
to Make Instruction Effective, Efficient, and Engaging.” In
Foundations of Learning and Instructional Design
Technology, edited by R.E. West. Edtech Books.
Miller, M.D. 2014. Minds Online: Teaching Effectively with
Technology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Moore, M.G. 2013. “The Theory of Transactional Distance.”
In Handbook of Distance Education, edited by M.C. Moore
and W.C. Diehl. Abington, UK: Routledge.
Morgan, N. 2021. “Why You Need to Gesture on Zoom.”
Public Words, February 23.

publicwords.com/2021/02/23/why-you-need-to-gesture-on-
zoom.
Myers, D.G. 2014. Myers’ Psychology for AP, 2nd ed. New
York: Worth Publishers.
Paas, F., J.E. Tuovinen, J.J.G. Van Merrienboer, and A.
Aubteen Darabi. 2005. “A Motivational Perspective on the
Relation Between Mental Effort and Performance:
Optimizing Learner Involvement in Instruction.”
Educational Technology Research and Development 53(3):
25–34.
Peck, M.S. 2003. The Road Less Traveled: A New Psychology
of Love, Traditional Values, and Spiritual Growth, 25th
anniversary ed. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Pelletier, K., M. Brown, D.C. Brooks, M. McCormack, J.
Reeves, N. Arbino, A. Bozkurt, S. Crawford, L.
Czerniewicz, R. Gibson, K. Linder, J. Mason, and V.
Mondelli. 2021. 2021 EDUCAUSE Horizon Report®
Teaching and Learning Edition. Educause.
library.educause.edu/resources/2021/4/2021-educause-
horizon-report-teaching-and-learning-edition.
Petras, K., and R. Petras. 2014. It Always Seems Impossible
Until It’s Done: Motivation for Dreamers and Doers. New
York: Workman Publishing Company.
Pfeffer, J., and R.I. Sutton. 2000. The Knowing-Doing Gap:
How Smart Companies Turn Knowledge Into Action.
Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Phelps, A., and D. Vlachopoulos. 2020. “Successful Transition
to Synchronous Learning Environments in Distance
Education: A Research on Entry-level Synchronous
Facilitator Competencies.” Education and Information
Technologies 25(3): 1511–1527.
Phillips, P.P., J.J. Phillips, and R. Ray. 2020. Proving the Value
of Soft Skills: Measuring Impact and Calculating ROI.
Alexandria, VA: ATD Press.
Pi, Z., J. Hong, and J. Yang. 2017. “Does Instructor’s Image
Size in Video Lectures Affect Learning Outcomes?”

Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 33(4): 347–354.
Quinn, C.N. 2021. Learning Science for Instructional
Designers: From Cognition to Application. Alexandria, VA:
ATD Press.
Rice, G.T. 2018. Hitting Pause: 65 Lecture Breaks to Refresh
and Reinforce Learning. Sterling, VA: Stylus Publishing.
Ross, L., D. Greene, and P. House. 1977. “The False
Consensus Effect: An Egocentric Bias in Social Perception
and Attribution Processes.” Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology 13(3): 279–301.
Rowe, M.B. 1986. “Wait Time: Slowing Down May Be a Way
of Speeding Up!” Journal of Teacher Education 37(1): 43–
50.
Ryan, R.M., and E.L. Deci. 2000. “Self-Determination Theory
and the Facilitation of Intrinsic Motivation, Social
Development, and Well-Being.” American Psychologist
55(1): 68–78.
Schnotz, W. 2014. “Integrated Model of Text and Picture
Comprehension.” In The Cambridge Handbook of
Multimedia Learning, edited by R.E. Mayer. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Schuett, D. 2016. “Skate to Where the Puck Is Going—
Position for the Future to Achieve a Competitive Edge.”
Digital Realty, January 28.
Short, J., E. Williams, and B. Christie. 1976. The Social
Psychology of Telecommunications. New York: John Wiley
& Sons.
Simon, C. 2016. Impossible to Ignore: Creating Memorable
Content to Influence Decisions. New York: McGraw-Hill
Education.
Smith, K. 2020. “57 Fascinating and Incredible YouTube
Statistics.” Brandwatch, February 21.
brandwatch.com/blog/youtube-stats.
Smith, S. 2008. “Why Follow Levels When You Can Build
Bridges?” Training & Development, September, 58–62.

Sousa, D.A. 2011. How The Brain Learns, 4th ed. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Stanier, M.B. 2021. “Humanizing the Virtual Experience.”
ATD-MAC Virtual Conference presentation, March 18.
Sweller, J., and J.J.G. van Merrienboer, and F.G.W.C. Paas.
1998. “Cognitive Architecture and Instructional Design.”
Educational Psychology Review 10(3): 251–296.
TechSmith. 2018. Video Viewer Habits, Trends, and Statistics
You Need to Know. Okemos, MI: TechSmith Corporation.
ul Haq, F. 2021. “Five Reasons Online Learning Is the Future
of Professional Development.” Forbes, March 26.
forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2021/03/26/five-reasons-
online-learning-is-the-future-of-professional-development.
Van Nuys, A., ed. 2020. 2020 Workplace Learning Report.
LinkedIn Learning.
learning.linkedin.com/content/dam/me/learning/resources/p
dfs/LinkedIn-Learning-2020-Workplace-Learning-
Report.pdf.
Van Nuys, A., ed. 2021. Workplace Learning Report: Skill
Building in the New World of Work. LinkedIn Learning.
learning.linkedin.com/content/dam/me/business/en-
us/amp/learning-solutions/images/wlr21/pdf/LinkedIn-
Learning_Workplace-Learning-Report-2021-EN-1.pdf.
Wang, Y., Q. Liu, W. Chen, Q. Wang, and D. Stein. 2018.
“Effects of Instructor’s Facial Expressions on Students’
Learning with Video Lectures.” British Journal of
Educational Technology 50(3): 1381–1395.
Yang, J., F. Zhu, P. Guo, and Z. Pi. 2019. “Instructors’
Gestures Enhance Their Teaching Experience and
Performance While Recording Video Lectures.” Journal of
Computer Assisted Learning 36(2): 189–198.
Zadina, J.N. 2014. Multiple Pathways to the Student Brain:
Energizing and Enhancing Instruction. San Francisco: John
Wiley & Sons.
Zuckerman, M., J. Porac, D. Lathin, R. Smith, and E.L. Deci.
1978. “On the Importance of Self-Determination for

Intrinsically-Motivated Behavior.” Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin 4(3): 443–446.
Zydney, J.M., P. McKimmy, R. Lindberg, and M. Schmidt.
2019. “Here or There Instruction: Lessons Learned in
Implementing Innovative Approaches to Blended
Synchronous Learning.” TechTrends 63(2): 123–132.

Index
Page numbers followed by f and t refer to figures and tables
respectively.
A
action plans, 46
active learning, 30
ADDIE instructional design, 40
Adobe Connect
breakout groups, 201
countdown timers, 197f
live polling, 194f
Randomizer extension, 190, 190f
virtual hand-raising, 184f
virtual whiteboards, 198f, 200–201, 201f
welcome messages, 68
advanced virtual tools, 197–205
affirm learner contributions, 78–79
agency, 104–105
Agile troubleshooting, 241–264
about, 10–11
and managing expectations, 242–244
with the 3 Ms Method (See 3 Ms Method)
agility, defined, 257

AI. See artificial intelligence
Alignment Model, 277, 277f
Allen, Michael, 20–21, 273, 284
“aluminum, linoleum, aluminum, linoleum,” 170
ambient noise, 150–151
Andreatta, Britt, 75, 77
angles, 137–138, 138f
animated gestures, 185–186, 186f
annotation tools, 190–193, 191f, 193f, 208t, 229–231, 235
anxiety, 87, 202
Aon, 325
application (level 3 of ROI Process Model), 276, 284–286
AR (augmented reality), 289
ARCS model, 30
Aristotle, 166
arrows, 233
articulation, 161
artificial intelligence (AI), 289, 291–294
about, 291–292
animated gestures, 186
challenges with, 293–294
chatbots, 292–293
for producer tasks, 292
Together Mode, 121
Ascilite Conference, 340–341
ASTD Journal, 274
asynchronous learning, 302–306
async role plays, in blended learning, 319–320

ATD, 1, 70, 176, 201, 250, 278, 283, 315
attendance, 278
Attensi, 305, 323–324, 324f
attention, 214
audio
for breakout groups, 201
distractions from, 150–152
equipment for, 170–172
importance of, 149–150
for live mixed learning, 343
and screen sharing, 188
troubleshooting, 248t, 249t
augmented reality (AR), 289
authenticity, 162–163
autonomy, 104–105, 205
B
backdrops, 128
background(s), 126–129
blurring your, 128
importance of, 126
purchasing a, 128, 128f
tidying what’s visible, 126–128, 127f
using slides as your, 129
virtual, 129
balanced movement, 220
basic virtual tools, 178–190
behavioral dimension, 29–31, 199, 305
Bell, Alexander Graham, 86

Bersin, Josh, 174, 235, 306–307
biases, 294, 353
Biech, Elaine, 79
Blackboard Collaborate, 228–229
BLEACH, 125–142, 125f
about, 125
angles, 137–138
background, 126–129
clothing, 138–139
expressions, 131–137
headroom, 140–142
lighting, 130–131
blended learning, 299–327, 309f
about, 301–302
asynchronous learning in, 302–306
async role plays in, 319–320
benefits of, 309–313
boosters in, 318–319
business use cases of, 323–325
components of, 314–323
and flipped classrooms, 301
for learner participation, 221–222
live mixed learning as, 355–356
pre-work in, 315–318
reflection during, 311–313
spaced repetition in, 309–310
synchronous learning in, 306–308
testing effect with, 310–311

videos during, 320–323
Bloom, Benjamin, 23
body alignment, 155
body movements, 136, 137f
Boller, Sharon, 19, 21, 36
boosters, 318–319
Bozarth, Jane, 22, 42, 182
breakout groups
about, 201–205, 202f, 209t
dynamic movements with, 235
for introductions, 56–57
for learner participation, 221
during lived mixed classes, 352
troubleshooting, 249t
troubleshooting during, 243
breaks, refresh, 236–237
breathing exercises, 165, 262
breath support, 154–155
brief pausing, 157–158
bullet points, 232–233
Bundy, C. B., 304
C
caffeine, 170
calling on learners, 222
camera lens eye contact, 132–134
cameras, 342. See also webcams
Camtasia Studio Library, 63
captioning, closed, 153

Carey, Jade, 261
cautious (5 Cs Pyramid), 54
Central China Normal University, 124, 132
challenges (7 Cs Framework for Case Scenario Design), 304
characters (7 Cs Framework for Case Scenario Design), 304
chatbots, 292–293
chat(s), 179–184, 206t
about, 179, 180f, 181
best practices, 182–184
dynamic movements in, 235
example, 180f
paired, 183
with producers, 255
reading comments from, 102–103
using, for inclusivity, 98
welcome messages in, 67–68
when to avoid, 181–182
check-ins, through chat, 179–180
choices (7 Cs Framework for Case Scenario Design), 304
Christensen, Clayton, 269
Christopher, Darlene, 82, 153, 157, 168
Cisco Webex, 151, 153, 186, 186f, 189f, 201
clarity, 100–101, 205
Clark, Richard, 34
Clark, Ruth Colvin, 21, 85, 164, 217–218, 297, 302, 308, 309
classrooms
flipped, 301
setup of, for live mixed learning, 344–345

class size, 346
closed captioning, 153
clothing, 138–139
clutter, 127
co-facilitators, 226, 348–349
cognitive dimension, 23–25, 181, 305
cognitive load, 90, 218–219, 348
cognitive overload, 84, 340–341
Coherence Principle, 234–235
collaboration, in live mixed learning, 351
comfortable (5 Cs Pyramid), 55–56
communications, pre-session, 59–60
community building, 337
Conceição, Simone, 22–23, 31
concepts, visual representation for, 233, 234t
connecting (5 Cs Pyramid), 56–57
connection moments, purposeful, 123–124
connections (7 Cs Framework for Case Scenario Design), 305
consequences (7 Cs Framework for Case Scenario Design),
304
constructive feedback, 101–102
content (7 Cs Framework for Case Scenario Design), 304
context (7 Cs Framework for Case Scenario Design), 304
contributing (5 Cs Pyramid), 57–58
costs, 336
countdown timers, 197, 197f, 208t
COVID-19, 1, 117, 176, 181, 268, 288, 299, 334, 337
credibility, 136, 138–139, 166, 247

cross-cultural classes, 68–69
Cuddy, Amy, 137
culture, 68–69
curious (5 Cs Pyramid), 54–55
D
Daley, Gene, 71, 77
Dalland, Katherine, 336
debriefs, 205, 290
Deci, Edward, 104–105
Design for How People Learn (Dirksen), 216
Designing the Online Learning Experience (Conceição and
Howles), 22–23, 31
design thinking, 20
Design Thinking for Training and Development (Boller and
Fletcher), 19, 21
diaphragm, 155
Digitell, 153
Dirksen, Julie, 21, 216, 235
discussion forums, 311–313, 312f
distractions
audio, 150–152
limiting, 214
limiting, learners’ area, 60
minimizing, 64–65
document uploads, 188–189, 189f, 207t, 248t
“do type learning activities,” 30
Douglas, Jillian, 104, 107
Draves, William A., 312

Duarte, Nancy, 219
Duhigg, Charles, 334
dynamic engagement, 213–239
about, 10, 213–215
and cognitive load, 218–219
and habituation, 215–217
principle of (See dynamic principle of engagement)
and working memory, 217–218
dynamic principle of engagement, 219–237
about, 219–220
platform tools and, 235–237
with visuals, 227–235
with vocal variety, 220–227
E
Edison, Thomas, 85–86
Edmondson, Amy, 71, 74, 76, 77
Einstein, Albert, 19
eLearning Manifesto (Allen et al.), 35
Elgato Key Light Air, 131
email notifications, 72
emoticons, 186–187
emotional dimension, 25–27, 55
empathy, 34–35
energy, 132, 168–169
engagement, 85. See also dynamic engagement
Eno, Kelly, 325
enthusiasm, 62, 65–66
enunciation, 161

environment shaping, 51–80
about, 7–8
and defining learning environment, 52–53
and 5 Cs Pyramid, 53–58
importance of, 51–52
laying out the welcome mat, 58–59
minimizing distractions, 64–65
opening the session (See opening the session)
pre-session communications, 59–60
psychological safety (See psychological safety)
tech check for, 63–64
welcome videos, 60–63
equity, 336–337
evaluating impact capability, 11–12
Evaluating Training Programs (Horton), 284
evaluations, 267–297
with Alignment Model, 277
frameworks for, 273–277
and innovation, 267–269
with Katzell’s Hierarchy of Steps, 273–274
with Kirkpatrick model, 274
and manager’s role in learning, 278–280
methods for, 272–273
with ROI Process Model, 274–277, 280–288
of virtual training, 269–271
as you go, 273
evidence-based practice, 21
examples, learners’ names incorporated in, 67

expectations, establishing
with live mixed learning, 347–348
with pre-session messaging, 59–60
in welcome videos, 62
experience design capability, 7, 17–47. See also learning
experience design (LXD)
experts, 34, 224, 225
expressions, 131–137
body movements, 136
and camera lens eye contact, 132–134
facial, 132
and hand gestures, 134–136, 135f
importance of, 131
during on-camera facilitation, 131–137
extended reality (XR), 289
external professional evaluators, 285
extraneous imagery, 234–235
extraneous load, 218
F
facial expressions, 132
facilitators
for breakout groups, 204–205
during live mixed learning, 348–353
multiple, 223–227
on-camera (See on-camera facilitation)
online (See online facilitation)
presence of (See facilitator presence)
facilitator presence, 115–146

about, 8–9
on camera (See on-camera facilitation)
importance of, 115–116
and on-camera participants, 142–145
through vocal delivery (See vocal delivery)
facts, visual representation for, 233, 234t
false consensus effect, 33
fast talkers, 158–159
fatigue, 120–121, 143
feedback
constructive, 101–102
live mixed learning, 355
reaction, 185–187, 206t
feedforward, 39–40, 273
fight-or-flight instinct, 219
filler words, 155–156
first-person pronouns, 164
First Principles, 30
5 Cs Pyramid, 53–58, 53f
cautious, 54
comfortable, 55–56
connecting, 56–57
contributing, 57–58
curious, 54–55
Fletcher, Laura, 19, 21, 36
flexibility, 257, 336
flipped classrooms, defined, 301
Florida State University (FSU), 119, 122, 143

forwarded mindedness, 294–295
four dimensions of learning, 22–32, 23f
behavioral dimension, 29–31
cognitive dimension, 23–25
emotional dimension, 25–27
integrating all, 31–32
social dimension, 27–29
frame rate, 134–135, 135f
Frederickson, Barbara, 45
FSU. See Florida State University
future innovative trends, 288–294
artificial intelligence, 291–294
and being forwarded minded, 294–295
immersive technologies, 289–290
increasing global connection, 290–291
G
gamification, 21
gender pronouns, 97
Gen X, 28
Gen Z, 28
Gering, David, 291, 293
germane load, 218
gestures, animated, 185–186, 186f
global connection, 290–291
global languages, 153–154
Global Market Insights, 1
“gold nugget comments,” 103
Google, 74, 291

Google Duplez, 291
GoToTraining, 191f
Great Resignation, 2
Gretzky, Walter, 266
group-think, 74
guest experts, 224
H
habituation, 215–217, 217t
hand gestures, 134–136, 135f, 164
Harvard Business Review, 28
Harvard Business School, 71
headroom, 140–142, 141f
headsets, noise-canceling, 171
health safety, 337
herbal tea, 169–170
“here or there instruction,” 331. See also live mixed learning
Hofmann, Jennifer, 50, 84, 102, 107, 109, 257, 299–300, 306
Hollingsworth, Matthew, 333
Horn, Robert E., 232
Horton, William, 16, 30, 247, 281, 284, 286, 295
Horwath, Aaron, 284
Howles, Les, 22–23, 31, 304
How to Measure Anything (Hubbard), 271
Hubbard, Douglas, 271
Huettl, Kim, 335, 355
Huggett, Cindy, 117–118, 142
humming, 170
humor, 165, 243

hybrid workplaces, 333–335
I
imagery, extraneous, 234–235
immersive technologies, 289–290
impact (level 4 of ROI Process Model), 276, 286–287
impact, evaluating. See evaluations
implicit biases, 353
inclusivity, 96–98
inequities, 339–340
inflection, 166–167, 216
innovation
evaluating impact and, 267–269
and evaluation, 268
future trends in (See future innovative trends)
in-person dynamics, 337
input (level 0 of ROI Process Model), 275
in-room cameras, 342
InSpace, 106, 202, 202f
Interaction Design Foundation, 20
interconnection, during lived mixed classes, 351
intermediate virtual tools, 190–197
international attendees, 68–69
internet connection, 248t
interpersonal connections, 56
interviews, 224
intrinsic load, 218
introductions
for connecting, 56

connecting during, 56–57
opening the session with, 72–73
introversion, 28
Irving, Larry, 288
IT technicians, 349–350
J
jewelry, 139
Jobs to Be Done (JTBD) Theory, 269–270
K
Kahneman, Daniel, 45
Kapp, Karl, 21
Katzell, Raymond, 273–274
Katzell’s Hierarchy of Steps, 273–274
Keller, John, 30
Khan, Salman, 117
Khan Academy, 117
Kirkpatrick, Donald L., 274
Kirkpatrick model, 274
Kirkpatrick Partners, 274
Klotz, Anthony, 2
The Knowing-Doing Gap (Pfeffer and Sutton), 35
Kotb, Hoda, 261
Kwinn, Ann, 217–218, 306, 308
L
LaBorie, Kassy, 111, 112, 205, 226, 260
language, 153
languages, global, 153–154

larynx, 154–155
“laying out the welcome mat,” 58–59
leadership, 75, 225
learner(s)
affirming contributions of, 78–79
calling on, 222
changing inertia of, 107–109
empowerment of (See learner empowerment)
encouraging participation of, 221–222
feedback from, to live mixed learning, 355
international, 68–69
motivations of, 25–26, 28
names of, using, 66–67, 183
on-camera, 142–145, 143f, 144f
participation of, when opening the session, 73–74
learner-centered empathic design, 32–35, 58
learner empowerment, 101–107
with learner agency and voice, 104–107
by linking to previous comments, 103–104
with positive reinforcement, 102–103
learner experience map, 42–44, 43f, 59
learner personas, 40–42, 41f
learning
active, 30
asynchronous, 302–306
blended (See blended learning)
four dimensions of (See four dimensions of learning)
as level 2 of ROI Process Model, 276, 283–284

live mixed (See live mixed learning)
relational, 222
synchronous, 306–308
learning environment, defined, 52–53
learning experience design (LXD), 18–22
about, 18–19
applying, 22
feedforward for, 39–40
and four dimensions of learning, 22–32
influences on, 19–22
learner-centered empathic design in, 32–35
learner personas in, 40–42
learners and stakeholders included in, 37–39
mapping learner experience in, 42–44
peak-end rule in, 44–46
strategies to apply, 37–46
task-centered design thinking in, 35–36
The Learning Guild, 315
Let Them Choose (Douglas and McKenzie), 104
lighting, 130–131, 130f
light reflectors, 131
likability, 55
LinkedIn Learning, 2, 28, 268
listening, webcams influence on, 120f
live interviews, 224
live mixed learning, 329–358, 333f, 338f
about, 332
advantages of, 335–338

as blended learning, 355–356
challenges of, 338–341
facilitation during, 348–353
facilitator training for, 353–354
and hybrid workplaces, 333–335
learner feedback to, 355
preparation for, 341–348
recording sessions during, 354–355
live polling
about, 194–195, 194f, 208t
agency encouraged through, 105–106
dynamic movements with, 235
evaluations with, 283
leveraging, 177
and psychological safety, 77
troubleshooting, 249t
LMS emails, 59
LXD. See learning experience design
M
manage (3 Ms Method), 254–261
about, 254–255
the predictable, 255–257
with a producer, 259–261
the unpredictable, 257–259
managers, critical role of, 278–280
Mayer, Richard, 163–164, 228, 230–231, 234, 317
McKenzie, Shannon, 104, 107
McLuhan, M., 240

McLuhan, Marshall, 290, 328
memory, working, 217–218, 340
Merrill, David, 30
messaging
paraverbal (See paraverbal messaging)
verbal (See verbal messaging)
welcome, 67–68
microphones, 170–171, 343
Microsoft Teams
background options on, 129
breakout groups, 106
screen sharing, 188
self-view on, 71
Together Mode, 121
translations, 153
welcome messages, 68
Miro, 200
mirroring, 168
mirror neurons, 168
mistakes, 77, 259
mitigate (3 Ms Method), 245–253
about, 245
with preventive action, 245–247
with ready-made solutions, 247–250, 248t–249t
by testing platform features, 251–253
through practice, 250–251
mixed reality (MR), 289
Monet, Claude, 140

monotone, 167
Moreno, Roxana, 230
Morgan, Nick, 134
move forward (3 Ms Method), 261–263
movement
with annotation, 229–230
balanced, 220
and “movement, rest, movement” strategy, 231–232
MR (mixed reality), 289
multiple facilitators, 223–227
multitasking, 111
Mural, 200
Murphy’s Law, 245
Mursion.com, 289
music, 63, 236
mute, 64, 92
Myers, David, 215
N
Nature, 28
nervousness, 132, 165
netiquette guidelines, 70–72, 350
neurons, mirror, 168
Nevitt, B., 240
Newton, Isaac, 211
Newton-Hill, Huw, 324
The New Virtual Classroom (Clark and Kwinn), 218
New World Kirkpatrick Model, 274
noise-canceling headsets, 171

Norman, Donald, 20
O
objectives, performance, 36
on-camera facilitation, 117–119, 118f, 120f
about, 117–118
benefits of, 118–120
BLEACH for (See BLEACH)
challenges of, 120–122
deciding when to use, 122–125
to welcome learners, 67
on-camera fatigue, 120–121
on-camera participants, 142–145, 143f, 144f
on-demand learners, 354
online facilitation, 83–113
about, 8
to aid learning, 85–96
and announced silence, 89–93
changing learner inertia during, 107–109
clarity throughout, 100–101
for conversational space, 96–100
empowering learners during, 101–107
importance of, 83–85
and inclusivity, 96–98
with pausing principle, 93–95
and producers, 109, 112
taski switching and multitasking during, 111
and testing effect, 95–96
time management during, 109–110

and uncomfortable silences, 93
verbalizing unseen, 86–89
with verbal signposts, 99–100
opening the session, 65–74
with brief platform tour, 69–70
with displayed welcome messages, 67–68
greeting with enthusiasm, 65–66
and international attendee acknowledgment, 68–69
with introductions, 72–73
learner participation when, 73–74
with netiquette guidelines, 70–72
using learners’ names, 66–67
Oprah Winfrey Show, 78
P
Padlet, 200
paired chat, 183
paralanguage, 153
paraverbal messaging, 161–169
about, 161–162
conversational style, 163–164
energy, 168–169
nervousness, 165
pitch, 165–166
tone, 162–163
vocal inflection, 166–167
participatory design, 37–39
pauses, 155–158, 157–158
pausing principle, 93–95

peak-end rule, 44–46
Peck, Scott, 240
performance objectives, 36
personalization, 67
Personalization Principle, 164, 317
Petriglieri, Gianpiero, 120
Pew Research, 288
Pfeffer, J., 35
Phillips, Jack J., 274–275
Phillips, Patti, 275
physical environment, in backgrounds, 126
Pichai, Sundar, 291
pitch, in vocal delivery, 165–166
platform tours, 69–70
Poll Everywhere, 106
polling, live. See live polling
positive reinforcement, 102
posture, 136, 155
practice, mitigating through, 250–251
pre-class activities, 221
pre-class conversations, 222
Presence (Cuddy), 137
Presenter Mode, 129
pre-session communications, 59–60
preventive action, 245–247
pre-work, 221, 302–303, 315–318, 315f, 316f
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 28
processes, visual representation for, 233, 234t

producers
advanced functions for, 112
and artificial intelligence, 292
increased role of, for vocal variety, 226–227
partnering with, 109, 259–261
and time management, 110
Producing Virtual Training, Meetings, and Webinars
(LaBorie), 112, 260
progressive builds, 228–229, 229f
Project Aristotle, 74
pronouns
first-person, 164
pronouns, gender, 97
pronunciation, 160
pro tips
about, 13
blended learning, 327
dynamic engagement, 239
environment shaping, 81
evaluating impact, 297
experience design, 49
live mixed learning, 358
on-camera, 147
online facilitation, 113
technical fluency, 211
troubleshooting, 265
vocal delivery, 173
Proving the Value of Soft Skills (Phillips, Phillips, and Ray),
284

psychological safety
affirming and rewarding learners to foster, 78–79
cultivating, 74–79
defined, 74–75
and encouraging different perspectives, 75–76
virtual tools to foster, 76–77
and vulnerability, 77–78
purposeful connection moments, 123–124
Q
questions, during pauses, 94
Quinn, Clark, 21, 30, 61, 65
quizzes
as boosters, 319
and testing effect, 95–96, 310–311
R
Randomizers, 190, 190f, 207t
reaction (level 1 of ROI Process Model), 250–251, 275
reaction feedback, 185–187, 206t
ready-made solutions, 247–250, 248t–249t
recording sessions, 354–355
redundancy principle, 219
reflections, 24, 311–313
reflectors, light, 131
refresh breaks, 236–237
relational learning, 222
relationships, working, 51, 222
repetition, spaced, 309–310

Reporter format, 129
reskilling, 1–2
Rice, Gail Taylor, 93–94
roaming cameras, 342
ROI (level 5 of ROI Process Model), 276–277, 287–288
ROI Institute, 275, 277
ROI Methodology, 274
ROI Process Model, 274–277, 280–288
role-playing, 289, 319–320
room support, for live mixed learning, 344–345
Rowe, Mary Budd, 93
Ryan, Richard, 104–105
S
safety
health, 337
psychological (See psychological safety)
SAM (Successive Approximation Method), 20–21
Science, 28
screen fatigue, 120–121, 143
screen sharing, 187–188, 187f, 207t, 235
screenshots, video, 323
scripts, 163
SDT (self-determination theory), 104–105
second monitors, 69–70
second-person pronouns, 164
self-determination theory (SDT), 104–105
self-view, 122
senior leaders, 225

7 Cs Framework for Case Scenario Design, 304–305
The Shadow, 166
Shafiei, Dorna Ericksson, 286
Shuffler, Marissa, 120, 122
signaling principle, 229–231
signposts, verbal, 99–100
silence(s)
announced, 89–93
brief pausing and, 158
uncomfortable, 93
and verbalizing unseen, 86–89
Simon, Carmen, 313
simulations, 289, 303
sirens, 170
Siri, 254
Sitte, Michael J., 343, 349–350
SkillPath, 67–68, 178, 260–261
SMEs (subject matter experts), 34, 225
social dimension
in asynchronous learning, 305
and breakout groups, 202
and connecting, 56
of learning, 27–29
in synchronous learning, 307
social presence, defined, 119
The Social Psychology of Telecommunications (Short,
Williams, and Christie), 119
solutions, ready-made, 247–250, 248t–249t

Sousa, David, 219
spaced repetition, in blended learning, 309–310
speaking rates, 158–160
Standout format, 129
Stanford University, 118
Stanier, Michael Bungay, 101
The State of Virtual Training 2020 (Huggett), 117–118, 142
status indicators, 185
Stewart, Dean, 345
strategic planning, 247–248
structural content, visual representation for, 234, 234t
subject matter experts (SMEs), 34, 225
The Successful Virtual Classroom (Christopher), 168
Successive Approximation Method (SAM), 20–21
surveys, 283
survival instincts, 219
Sutton, R. I., 35
synchronous learning, 306–308
T
TAKE TODAY (McLuhan and Nevitt), 240
“talking your task,” 87–88
task-centered design thinking, 35–36
task switching, 111
tea, 169–170
Teaching Online (Draves), 312
tech checks, 63–64, 247
technical fluency
about, 9

defined, 175
and virtual tools (See virtual tools)
technology
immersive, 289–290
influence of, 52
issues with, 339
live mixed learning, 342–345
support for, 349–350
TechSmith Corporation, 320–321
Telling Ain’t Training (Keeps and Stolovitch), 284
testimonials, 319
testing effect, 95–96, 310–311
testing platform features, 251–253
Thalheimer, Will, 21
3 Ms Method, 244–263, 245f
about, 244–245
manage, 254–261
mitigate, 245–253
move forward, 261–263
three-finger rule, for measuring headroom, 142
time management, 109–110, 340–341
timers, countdown. See countdown timers
title slide, 67
Together Mode, 121
tone, in vocal delivery, 162–163
tools, virtual. See virtual tools
training, for live mixed learning, 353–354
translations, 153–154, 224

2020 State of the Industry Report (ATD), 1
2020 Workplace Learning Report, 2, 28, 268, 291
2021 EDUCAUSE Horizon Report, 52, 289, 334
2021 State of Remote Work, 333
U
Understanding Media (McLuhan), 290
upskilling, 1–2
US Department of Education, 309
US Department of Labor, 2
user experience design (UXD), 20
V
van Gogh, Vincent, xi
verbalizing unseen, 86–89
verbal messaging, 154–161
about, 154
breath support, 154–155
brief pausing, 157–158
enunciation, 161
pronunciation, 160
speaking rate, 158–160
vocalized pauses, 155–157
verbal signposts, 99–100
video conferencing platform, 344
videos, 195–196, 208t, 235
during blended learning, 320–323
viewer engagement with, 321f, 322f
Virtual Classrooms (ATD), 278, 283, 285, 287

virtual hand raising, 184–185, 184f, 206t
virtual reality (VR), 289
virtual tools, 175–210, 206t–209t
advanced, 197–205
annotation tools, 190–193
basic, 178–190
breakout groups, 201–205
chat, 179–184
countdown timer, 197
document upload, 188–189
dynamic principle of engagement applied to, 235–237
importance of leveraging, 175–178
intermediate, 190–197
live polling, 194–195
psychological safety fostered with, 76–77
randomizer, 190
reaction feedback, 185–187
screen sharing, 187–188
video clip playback, 195–196
virtual hand raising, 184–185
virtual whiteboards, 198–201
Virtual Trainer Capability Model, 1–15, 6f
about, 3–6
applying, 13–14
core areas of, 7–12
development, 1–3
virtual whiteboards, 198–201, 198f, 209t, 235
visuals

annotation in, 229–231
based on content type, 232–234, 234t
dynamic principle of engagement applied to, 227–235
progressive builds in, 228–229
removing extraneous imagery, 234–235
vocal care, 169–170
vocal cords, 169
vocal delivery, 149–173
and audio distractions, 150–152
elements of, 153
and global languages, 153–154
importance of, 149–150
inflection, 166–167, 216
paraverbal messaging (See paraverbal messaging)
variety in (See vocal variety)
and verbal messaging (See verbal messaging)
and vocal care, 169–170
and vocal variety, 220–227
vocalized pauses, 155–157
vocal variety
dynamic principle of engagement applied to, 220–227
learner voices for, 220–223
multiple facilitators for, 223–227
Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP), 151
VR (virtual reality), 289
vulnerability, 77–78
W
wait-time principle, 222

warm-ups, 69, 108, 169–170
webcams, 120f
troubleshooting, 249t
Webcams at Work study, 122
welcome messages, 67–68
welcome videos, 60–63, 61f, 317, 318f
what’s in it for me? (WIIFM), 65
whiteboards
during lived mixed classes, 352–353
virtual (See virtual whiteboards)
WIIFM (what’s in it for me?), 65
wireless microphones, 342–343
working memory, 217–218, 340
working relationships, 51, 222
X
XR (extended reality), 289
Y
YouTube, 117
Z
Zadina, Janet, 25, 87, 114, 132, 214, 310
Zoom
annotation tools, 191–192
background options on, 129
breakout groups, 106, 201, 202f
platform tour of, 69
screen sharing, 187f
video clip playback, 195–196, 196f

welcome messages, 68
Zoom Rooms, 343, 352

About the Author
Diana L. Howles, MA, is an award-winning speaker, global
virtual facilitator, and master trainer who brings 25 years of
experience in the talent development industry. A virtual
training expert, Diana has designed and facilitated live online
and blended learning programs for clients since 2000. As a
worldclass online facilitator, she has trained organizations on a
variety of professional business skills in more than a dozen
countries, including Fortune 100 and 500 companies,
government agencies, and educational institutions. Diana is
CEO and co-founder of Howles Associates, a multimedia
company that specializes in live online learning, and provides
consulting, coaching, courses, 
and critiques to help
professionals improve their effectiveness with virtual training
programs and virtual presentations.
Diana has authored several learning and development
articles over the years on trainingmag.com and in publications
such as TD, Learning Solutions, and Training. She is a past
president of the Association for Talent Development (ATD)
Madison Area Chapter and was their first virtual presenter
during the early 2000s showcasing and championing how web

conferencing technologies could facilitate online training.
Diana was also the first trainer to be certified through
SkillPath’s certification program for virtual trainers. In other
past roles, she has worked as a learning and development
manager, corporate senior trainer, learning designer, learning
development consultant, leadership coach, systems trainer, and
as a professional on-camera and voiceover talent. Diana also
taught at Colorado State University and Edgewood College
and has led and facilitated virtual classes for the University of
Wisconsin-Madison and the University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee. As a seasoned professional, she is a respected
thought leader in the field, and colleagues refer to her as a
trainer’s trainer. She is passionate about helping virtual
learning professionals be successful, fascinated by learning
technologies and multimedia, and committed to positively
impacting the workplace.
Diana has a master of arts from Colorado State University
and holds a bachelor’s degree in communication and business
administration. She is a frequent presenter at international and
national in-person and virtual conferences. Diana also
keynotes nationally.
As a lifelong learner, she enjoyed participating in an
international exchange program in Germany and touring with
singing ensembles across the UK and US. She lives in the
Midwest in the United States with her family and very high-
maintenance (but lovable) dog. You can connect with Diana at
linkedin.com/in/dianahowles and @DianaHowles.

