A FACILITATOR’S 
HANDBOOK
OCTOBER 2021

A FACILITATOR’S HANDBOOK
2
Introduction	
3
Principles of facilitation	
4
The role of the facilitator	
4
The facilitator’s mindset	
5
Planning, purpose, place and people	
5
	
Planning	
5
	 Purpose	
5
	 Place	
6
	 People	
6
Decisions to make about how you will facilitate	
7
	
Structure	
7
	 Pace and energy	
7
	 Democracy	
8
	 Consider the medium of the conversation	
8
	 Capturing and harvesting	
9
Structure	
10
Before the meeting	
10
The welcome: creating the environment you want	
10
The Diamond of Participation	
1 1
	
Open / Divergence	
12
	 Explore / Emergence	
12
	 Close / Convergence	
12 
	 The Diamond of Participation diagram	
13
Activities	
14
Check-ins and check-outs	
14
	
Chat waves	
14
Creating the container	
15
Asking questions	
15
Thinking alone, thinking together	
16
Question storming	
16
Liberating Structures	
17
	
Virtual tips and tools	
18
	
Planning for a virtual meeting	
18
	 Using Zoom break-out rooms	
19
	 Using online platforms	
19
	 The tech host role and co-facilitation	
19
	 Expect things to take longer	
20
Becoming a better facilitator	
21
What to practise	
21
How and where to practise	
21
Resources	
22
	
Resources on virtual facilitation	
22
	 Books	
22
 Appendix: Document URLs	
23
Credits	
24
Curiosity Society	
24 
Active Gloucestershire	
24
we can move	
24
Contents

A FACILITATOR’S HANDBOOK
3
Summary
The ability to facilitate starts with understanding the role of 
the facilitator and the facilitator’s mindset. The next ingredient 
is having a clear purpose for a meeting or gathering. This 
purpose will guide the facilitator’s choices of venue, who to 
invite, and how they facilitate. The amount of structure, how 
decisions are made and how a meeting is recorded are all 
important decisions that should be made with intention.
The structure of the meeting is likely to follow a pattern of 
opening, exploring and closing. Understanding this ‘diamond 
of participation’ and planning for each stage helps a facilitator 
to ensure a group shares a lot of diverse ideas, can have room 
for disagreement and improving the ideas, and can make 
choices between them, with clear next steps. With a clear 
purpose and structure, it becomes easier to select and  
adapt activities.
All of these principles and techniques apply to virtual 
facilitation as well as in-person. In fact, making intentional 
decisions ahead of a meeting becomes more important when 
it is more difficult to adjust on the go. There are additional 
considerations to take into account such as extra planning, 
using technology and working with a tech host or co-
facilitator.
Finally, facilitation is a skill that can be practised and learnt 
over time. This is more than having a few more activities under 
your belt. You might practise asking better questions, giving 
clear instructions or even trying your hand at improvisation. 
Finding opportunities to try things out and get feedback  
helps a lot.
How to navigate and use this handbook
You are very welcome to read this handbook from front-to-
back, but you can also dip into each section for your particular 
needs. Even if you are a more experienced facilitator, you 
might be tempted to skip over the Principles of Facilitation 
section. However, you might find this section helps you  
understand your facilitation practice in a new light.
Using supporting links
Clickable links to related pages and supporting online  
content are available throughout this handbook. For those 
using non-digital handbooks, an appendix of URL links are 
provided on page 23. 
Introduction	 	
Facilitation can enable us to have better 
gatherings and make the most of the 
collective wisdom of a group.
For Active Gloucestershire, facilitation is particularly 
important in catalysing the social movement, we can move. 
Well-facilitated gatherings can enable schools, employers, 
religious organisations, neighbourhood groups, social 
clubs and charities to come together as more than the sum 
of their parts to increase levels of physical activity across 
Gloucestershire.
The handbook builds on a pair of workshops with the Active 
Gloucestershire team led by the Curiosity Society in early 
2021. Thank you to everyone who took part.

A FACILITATOR’S HANDBOOK
4
The role of the facilitator 
“We use “facilitation” to describe a style of 
engaging others toward a goal. We generally 
assume that goal is learning, which we use 
in the broadest of ways: learning content 
knowledge, learning about oneself and others, 
or unlearning (our favorite type of learning). 
[...] The facilitator is the person responsible for 
guiding the learning process.”
   Unlocking the Magic of Facilitation,  
Sam Killermann and  Meg Bolger
“A facilitator is someone trained in the skill 
of shaping group dynamics and collective 
conversations.”
  The Art of Gathering 
Priya Parker
Facilitation can involve a wide range of activities – from fun 
games to emotional conversations. At its heart, facilitation is 
about good ‘process’ – providing a structure and environment 
which allow something new to emerge. It can help take a mess 
of ideas and people to some kind of conclusion in the form of 
plans and improved ideas.
A facilitator in the purest sense will be neutral to the outcome 
of a meeting. They instead focus on creating an environment 
in which people are comfortable sharing, there is balance in 
who speaks, they ask questions that move the conversation 
along, keep track of time and make adjustments to the plan as 
they read the energy of the room and the changing needs of 
the group.
An assumption behind facilitation is that the wisdom of 
the group is greater than the wisdom of any individual. By 
having someone to look after the process, attendees can 
fully immerse themselves in participating, contributing more 
of their experience and expertise. Done well, this leads to a 
better, more creative outcome which has the support of more 
of the group and leads to better relationships amongst  
the group. 
However, in practice, facilitators are almost never completely 
neutral. As well as having their own social and psychological 
biases, a facilitator may bring content expertise, might have 
leadership responsibilities or may have called the meeting 
with a clear sense of what they want to get out of it.
In this case, rather than pretending to be neutral, the facilitator 
should acknowledge the multiple ‘hats’ they are wearing and, 
perhaps, naming the biases they might have. For example, if 
there is an agenda item where they have subject expertise, 
they might wear the ‘expert hat’ for that part, asking someone 
else to facilitate that section. Similarly, a leader might ask 
for someone else to facilitate if there is an issue they are 
particularly invested in.
“The facilitative leader role is the most difficult 
facilitative role to fill because you need to use 
facilitative skills at the same time you’re deeply 
involved in the content of the conversation 
and the decision-making process. [...] And the 
more you’re involved in the content and the 
stronger your views on the content are, the 
more difficult it is to be curious about others’ 
views and ask others to identify any gaps or 
problems in your reasoning.”
   The Skilled Facilitator,  
Roger Schwarz
 
One risk of trying to wear multiple hats at the same time is 
what can be called ‘facipulation’ – a portmanteau of facilitation 
and manipulation. In this scenario, the so-called facilitator has 
a very clear outcome in mind for the conversation and guides 
the conversation to that conclusion. This is one sure-fire way 
to lose trust in the idea of facilitation!
“Be selective about when you share your 
opinion or experiences. Your opinion will often 
create a climate where the “neutral” is similar 
to you, disproportionate to other people’s 
sharing. Know your voice carries this weight 
every time you decide to weigh in.”
  Unlocking the Magic of Facilitation,  
Sam Killermann and  Meg Bolger
Principles of facilitation

A FACILITATOR’S HANDBOOK
5
Principles of Facilitation
The facilitator’s mindset
In The Skilled Facilitator, Roger Schwarz claims that “the 
most challenging part of facilitation is not the group – it’s your 
mindset and how the group affects it”.  He advocates for 
operating in the ‘mutual learning mindset’:
“The mutual learning mindset comprises the 
core values of transparency, curiosity, informed 
choice, accountability, and compassion. When 
you operate from the mutual learning mindset, 
rather than assuming you understand and 
are right while others who disagree don’t 
understand and are wrong, you assume that 
each of us is missing information and that the 
differences are opportunities for learning. You 
recognise that you may be contributing to the 
very problems you’re complaining about.”
   The Skilled Facilitator  
Roger Schwarz
 
While many of us might operate out of this mindset when 
we’re at our best, it’s when we are challenged, triggered and 
tired that it is most difficult to maintain this. This is also the 
most important time to be in this mindset.
In situations where you find yourself getting worked up, it can 
be helpful to pause for a moment to recognise this, take a 
breath and return again to being curious, open and humble. 
It’s not easy to do this, but it can help the rest of the group a 
great deal and get things back on track.
“Listening is key to all good communication.  
The problem is that we think we are great 
listeners until we hear something that isn’t 
consistent with our current thinking. Then we 
become tense, contracted, and defensive, and 
the conversation fails to expand into  
new territory.”
   Compassionate Conversations 
Diane Musho Hamilton, Gabriel Menegale 
Wilson, and Kimberly Myosai Loh
Planning, purpose, place and people
Planning
It is sometimes possible to facilitate a group to a great 
outcome on the fly. However, for most of us, most of the time, 
the meeting will go a lot better if we think about the purpose, 
the structure, the tone, the technology  and more, well ahead 
of time.
It can take much longer than the duration of the meeting to 
prepare for it – especially if the brief changes, the meeting is 
remote and there are multiple facilitators. While this might feel 
inefficient, a badly-run meeting is a much worse waste of time 
when you consider the number of people involved. In fact, 
it’s very easy for a meeting to make things worse rather than 
better if it confuses or even upsets participants.
In the section on Virtual Tips and Tools there is a sample 
session planning table you can use to capture your plan.
Purpose
“The first step in convening people 
meaningfully: committing to a bold, sharp 
purpose. 
[...] 
Make purpose your bouncer. Let it decide what 
goes into your gathering and what stays out. 
When in doubt about any element, even the 
smallest detail, hark back to that purpose and 
decide in accordance with it.”
   The Art of Gathering  
Priya Parker
A purpose is not the same as an agenda. A good purpose will 
tell you not only what you’re trying to achieve, but also what 
you won’t be discussing.
Reviewing the purpose of a gathering is especially important 
when you’re moving online a meeting that normally happens 
in-person. It may turn out that your meeting means different 
things to different people. To one colleague it’s about hearing 
updates, to another it’s a chance to catch up and connect, to 
another it’s about prioritising next steps.
The best way to figure out the purpose is to ask people ahead 
of time what they want to get out of the meeting (yup… it’s not 
rocket science!). If they say different things, then you can have 
a conversation about different ways to meet their needs. Can 
some of it be done on a shared document or an email update? 
Do you need another meeting, maybe with a smaller group of 
people? In what order might you tackle the needs of different 
people? 

A FACILITATOR’S HANDBOOK
6
Principles of Facilitation
If you think about it as a process of offline and online 
activities instead of a single event, you may stumble on a 
more effective option. It’s better to consider this openly than to 
end up spending a couple of hours satisfying nobody.
One way to get to a more compelling purpose is to keep on 
asking ‘why?’. You can do this five times to get to the root of 
why a meeting is happening. It might surprise you!
Place
A location can inspire a group to think differently. Are you in 
a cosy room with cushions and low lighting or an auditorium 
with stage lighting? Have people had to travel somewhere 
different? Have you moved the chairs and tables around in 
your standard meeting room?
“Switching the configuration of the room 
can create new energy: swap the seating 
arrangement (e.g., if you were in a classroom 
style, change it to an open circle, or small pods) 
and ask participants to sit by someone new.”
   Unlocking the Magic of Facilitation,  
Sam Killermann and  Meg Bolger
 
You can be creative with this even when working remotely 
– ask participants to light a candle, sit somewhere different 
or even have a different virtual background. You could send 
a fancy tea bag in the post for everyone to drink together or 
suggest that they have a walk around the block in the mid-
session break.
Try to look after physical needs of the participants. Work 
with biology, not against it! If you’re in person, provide good 
snacks or meals, choosing refreshments to avoid a sugar 
crash or a carb-induced post-lunch slump. If you’re working 
virtually, make sure people have had time for refreshments 
if you’re meeting over lunchtime. And either way, don’t go 
too long without a break and encourage people to look after 
themselves, even if that means stepping out of the meeting for 
a few minutes.
People
Who needs to be in the meeting? The more people you 
have, the more difficult it is for everyone to meaningfully 
contribute. It can help to do some basic meeting arithmetic 
and multiplying how many people you expect to come by how 
long you think each of them should contribute (e.g. 12 people 
speaking for five minutes each is an hour). Of course, in reality, 
some people will speak for much longer than others.  It’s no 
wonder that meetings often run over, with several people still 
feeling like they didn’t have their say. 
The rest of this guide will give many ideas for enabling many 
people to contribute and for this to add up to achieving 
the purpose of the meeting. However, it’s still a good idea 
to exercise restraint in who is invited. This is especially true 
for remote meetings where there is a much lower barrier 
to joining a Zoom videoconference, and it’s easy to invite 
everyone just to be polite.
There are ways around this. Can you record the meeting 
(or parts of it) to watch back later? Or can you capture it in 
another way so that those who couldn’t attend can quickly 
understand what was discussed and decided?
When preparing, it’s not only the number of people you need 
to consider but whether there are any difficult dynamics 
that could surface and the diversity of the group you are 
assembling. Remember that it is a powerful choice you are 
making to include or exclude different voices. If you are 
making the decision to keep a meeting small, consider other 
ways for the views of a larger group to be heard.

A FACILITATOR’S HANDBOOK
7
Principles of Facilitation
Decisions to make about how you  
will facilitate
Facilitators need to be able to make an informed decision 
on how they will design and facilitate each session. While 
facilitators tend to have a style they tend towards (e.g. fun and 
fast, or reflective and deep), it helps to have some range and 
to be able to adapt to different circumstances.
The section below describes a few design choices to be made 
ahead of a session.
Another way of doing this is to use Daniel Stillman’s 
Conversation Design Operating System canvas. 
The nine sections are:
•	People and diversity
•	Invitation and initiation
•	Power and permission
•	Turn taking and silence
•	Interface and space
•	Cadence and rhythm
•	Threading and narrative
•	Goals and agreements, and
•	Error and repair.
There is a template version of it you can use for free on 
Mural  (an online whiteboard tool).
Structure
The amount of structure chosen should support the intended 
purpose and tone of the meeting. 
Structure and process can be liberating and allow a group to 
improvise within boundaries. If you have a process you trust, 
you can create a safe container for ideas and conversation to 
flow.  This is the whole idea of Liberating Structures – that 
the right kind of structures can invite participation, creativity 
and wisdom.
Too much structure can be limiting, especially if the facilitator 
does not adapt it to changing circumstances. On the other 
hand, not having enough structure can be frustrating. 
A conversation that feels nice and open but doesn’t go 
anywhere can understandably lead to losing trust in the 
process. A lack of structure can also mean that the same 
characters talk more.
Pace and energy
Choose the pace and level of energy that is appropriate for 
the purpose of your meeting and the people involved.
Sometimes a slow, reflective discussion with plenty of space 
for people to express their feelings and perspectives is helpful. 
Other times, a rapid-fire meeting with time limits and efficient 
chairing is what the group needs. Indeed, both of these can be 
useful within the same meeting.
If you have a discussion that needs room to breathe, don’t 
be tempted to cram it into a time box – especially when it is 
emotionally important. This might feel efficient in the meeting 
itself, but probably means it won’t be dealt with properly and 
you’ll need to revisit it. One way of dealing with this is to pick a 
part of the larger issue to discuss and make progress on. 
The meeting arithmetic (see the section on People) of how 
many people are in the meeting will help you decide how 
much you need to speed up or slow down. For something 
like a check-in or sharing back from breakout rooms, it can 
be helpful to explicitly name how much time there is for the 
section and how many people will be sharing so that the group 
can self-regulate.
Consider the energy of the meeting. There is a place for 
silence – either as a pause to allow people to gather their 
thoughts or as people are using a virtual whiteboard or typing. 
This can suit the introverts in the room. A slightly chaotic 
discussion with post-it notes flying around is more likely to suit 
extraverts. Try to mix this up in different sections.
How you act and speak will change the level of energy. For 
instance, if you slow down your speech and talk gently, the  
rest of the group will probably mirror you. 

A FACILITATOR’S HANDBOOK
8
Principles of Facilitation
Democracy
In a status update meeting, a leader might present what has 
been happening with a short time for questions at the end. In a 
freewheeling creative conversation, the process itself might be 
up for discussion and everyone is able to contribute as much 
as they want. Most facilitated sessions will be somewhere 
between these extremes. 
A simple way to be more democratic is to ensure people 
have an equal opportunity to speak. Going round the room 
(physical or virtual) and taking turns, perhaps timed, is a 
simple way to do this. One reason a check-in is a powerful 
tool is that it means that everyone has spoken at the beginning 
of the meeting. If there are people who tend to dominate 
meetings, you might need to speak with them ahead of time to 
suggest that they need to hold back for the good of the group.
Other ways to hear from more voices described later in this 
handbook include:
•	Breakout groups – it’s easier and safer to share in a 
smaller group
•	Thinking alone then thinking – give time for people to 
formulate their thoughts before speaking so it’s not  
only the most confident people jumping in first
•	Voting – reveal the group’s preferences
•	Checking understanding and reading the room to  
see who is engaging.
Also consider what level of agreement you need from the 
group for a particular decision. Do you need consensus 
(everyone agreeing) or only consent (nobody has a strong 
objection)?
Note that the facilitator is part of the power dynamics of a 
group. A facilitator can act as a kind of benevolent dictator, 
wielding their power over the process in order for the group 
to make the most of its expertise and experience. For that 
reason, it’s a good idea to ask permission to facilitate from the 
group up-front. This includes looking after the process and 
timing, and sometimes cutting them short for the good of the 
group. Saying this up-front makes it less awkward when you 
do need to interrupt.
 “Ask the group check-in questions throughout 
the workshop. Ask them what they think about 
things. Ask them how they feel. Ask them to 
rephrase points you made, or someone else 
in the room made. Ask them to reflect back 
on the first half of a workshop aloud. Process 
the process. Ask them whatever you need to 
know... just, you know, shut up once you do.”
   Unlocking the Magic of Facilitation  
Sam Killermann and  Meg Bolger
The dark side of the power of the facilitator is that it’s easy to 
lose track of how the group is doing and fixate on following 
the process no matter whether it is still useful or not. One way 
around this is to ask the group at times how they are finding 
the process. While it is possible to get some impression 
of how the group is feeling from body language and vocal 
tone, a simple question like: ‘Would you like to continue this 
discussion or move on?’ can reveal the preferences of the 
group.
Consider the medium of the conversation
In a normal face-to-face conversation, the medium is air. 
Sometimes we might write on sticky notes or a whiteboard, 
which helps us have a common understanding of what 
ideas are emerging and where we have agreement or 
disagreement. Often one person will be taking notes that are 
shared afterwards.
When we’re on a teleconference it can be more difficult to 
track where the conversation is going. The medium lacks 
nuance. We don’t have the visual cues we have in person and 
it’s difficult to jump in and say you’re confused. This is one 
reason that it is helpful for people to turn on their cameras 
during virtual meetings — it helps everyone to read the room 
(plus, seeing faces makes humans happy!). It also helps to 
have norms for hand gestures for showing agreement or 
disagreement (clapping, thumbs up/down, etc.) or for raising 
hands for a question.
In a virtual space, we can go further than this by having a 
shared space to not only record the conversation but to allow 
contributions from many people in parallel. A simple way to 
do this is a ‘chat wave’ in the Zoom chat box (see the section 
on Check-ins and Check-outs). You could also use a virtual 
whiteboard such as JamBoard, Mural or Miro, or a simple 
Google Doc. Just watch out for overwhelming people with 
multiple applications and windows and be really clear about 
where people should be looking. Keep it simple.

A FACILITATOR’S HANDBOOK
9
Principles of Facilitation
Capturing and harvesting
Capturing and harvesting the meeting enables you to have a 
shared sense of what is happening during the meeting and to 
remember and share this afterwards. There is a good reason 
why flip-charts and post-it notes are ubiquitous in in-person 
workshops: they allow us to make the conversation visible to 
those present in the room and to have an accurate record that 
can be photographed, written up and shared afterwards. This 
ensures that the conversation does not stay in the meeting. 
This, of course, happens with more conventional meetings in 
the form of minutes.
If you have been thoughtful about the medium of the 
conversation, you can make use of this to capture meaning 
as you go, checking with the group that what you’re writing 
accurately reflects what they’re saying. This can be most 
helpful when they point out how you’ve missed the point!
“As you go, ask the team, “Does this look right?” 
or “How should I capture that?” And when the 
conversation starts to stall out, you can nudge 
it to conclusion by saying, “Is there a good way 
we can capture this thinking and move on?”
  Sprint  
Jake Knapp
If you’re a visual thinker, you can go beyond written notes to 
draw diagrams and doodles. Books like Sunni Brown’s Doodle 
Revolution can teach you how to do this, and you can quickly 
get better with practice. You don’t need to be an artist for your 
drawing to help bring out the creativity in a group.
“A good sketch has just enough information to 
get an idea across, and no more.”
  Gamestorming  
Dave Gray, Sunni Brown, and James Macanufo 
 

A FACILITATOR’S HANDBOOK
10
Before the meeting
“A colleague in the conflict-resolution field 
taught me a principle I have never forgotten: 
90 percent of what makes a gathering 
successful is put in place beforehand.”
  The Art of Gathering  
Priya Parker
Remember to think about how people find out about the 
meeting, how they are invited, what they read or watch 
beforehand and how they arrive. Does the meeting have a 
compelling name? Do you need to have a phone call with 
each person beforehand to check what they are thinking? Do 
people get invited in an Identikit email or a hand-written note? 
Do they look at the pre-reading in a scrambled five minutes 
before the meeting or at their leisure a few days before? Do 
they have to look back across 17 emails to find the Zoom 
link, only to discover that the meeting is on Teams and has a 
password? All of these things will make a big difference to 
how they feel, think and act on arrival and therefore how they 
will contribute.
The welcome: creating the environment 
you want 
“Hosts often don’t realize that there tends to 
be unfilled, unseized time between guests’ 
arrival and the formal bell-ringing, glass-
clinking, or other form of opening. Make use 
of this no-man’s-land.”
  The Art of Gathering 
Priya Parker
What will people find when they arrive at the meeting? The 
default tends to be awkward small talk but we can do better 
than this! This is your chance to set the tone. There are all 
manner of things you can do to signal what kind of meeting 
this will be.
If you want an upbeat start, you might play some lively music. 
If you’re in-person, you might have some tasty snacks on hand 
(or encourage them to get some in their own home if meeting 
remotely). To orient people, you might have the agenda 
written up on a slide or on a wall, perhaps in a visual form like 
that of a journey. If you’re on Zoom, you could put people into 
breakout rooms straight away to mingle. 
Try something different in your next meeting. At the very least 
it will grab people’s attention and mitigate their  
meeting fatigue!
Structure

11
Structure
A FACILITATOR’S HANDBOOK
The Diamond of Participation 
“Every game is a world which evolves in 
stages, as follows: imagine the world, create 
the world, open the world, explore the world, 
and close the world.”
   Gamestorming 
Dave Gray, Sunni Brown and James Macanufo
While excellent meetings come in all shapes and sizes, a 
common pattern is of opening at the beginning, exploring 
in the middle and closing at the end. This creates the shape 
of a hexagon, but is known as the diamond of participation. 
Opening, exploring and closing is also something known as 
divergence, emergence and convergence.
Each of the three elements is necessary. If you do not open up 
to a wide set of perspectives and ideas, you’ll be missing out 
on potential options to choose from later on. If you skip the 
explore phase, you’ll miss the opportunity to have productive 
disagreements and improve the ideas. Finally, if you open 
things up, you should make sure to close, otherwise things feel 
messy and it leaves the issue and next steps unresolved.
 
“Often the worst thing you can do with a 
difficult question is to try to answer it too 
quickly. When the mind is coming up with 
What If possibilities, these fresh, new ideas 
can take time to percolate and form.”
  A Beautiful Question 
Warren Berger
When planning a session, think about the balance between 
opening, exploring and closing. It’s likely that you find yourself 
drawn more to one than the others. Some people love asking 
big questions to open up conversations. Some enjoy holding 
the tension of paradoxical ideas. And others like things to 
be resolved neatly. If you know which of these you are most 
drawn to, you can regulate yourself and maybe ask for help 
from someone with complementary skill sets and preferences.
Open, explore and close can work at different scales 
(sometimes simultaneously). You can use it for a five-minute 
breakout conversation, for a one hour meeting and for a 
twelve-month strategic planning process.
A simple version of the Diamond of Participation

12
Structure
A FACILITATOR’S HANDBOOK
Open / Divergence
At this stage, you want to ask big questions, generate lots of 
ideas and look at things in a different way. It can be helpful to 
have a mix of solo working, pairs and trios, and larger group 
discussions in order to allow both introverts and extraverts to 
contribute fully.
“The keyword for opening is “divergent”: 
you want the widest possible spread of 
perspectives; you want to populate your world 
with as many and as diverse a set of ideas as 
you can.”
   Gamestorming 
Dave Gray, Sunni Brown and James Macanufo
Explore / Emergence
This is the space for courage, disagreement and improving 
the options you have. As you can see in the diagram, this can 
be known as the ‘groan zone’ as it can often be a frustrating 
experience. As a facilitator, it’s your job to hold the group in 
this zone for longer than they’d probably like, because the 
pay-off comes in the form of better ideas than actually address 
the root cause. In this stage, it’s especially important to create 
a healthy environment for disagreement and healthy conflict. 
If you have agreed how you want to work together at the 
beginning of the meeting, you might want to revisit this. 
“The keyword for the exploring stage is 
“emergent”: you want to create the conditions 
that will allow unexpected, surprising, and 
delightful things to emerge.”
   Gamestorming 
Dave Gray, Sunni Brown and James Macanufo
Close / Convergence
The final stage is for synthesis, decisions, prioritisation and 
next steps. This might mean finding consensus, checking for 
a group’s consent for what happens next, voting between 
options or wrapping up with some closing remarks or a  
check out.
If you’re opening up a big, contentious issue, you should plan 
enough time to resolve it to at least some extent.  Closing 
doesn’t have to mean finding consensus - it could just mean 
identifying the next questions you need to ask or identifying 
who is responsible for arranging the next conversation. 
“The keyword for the closing act is 
“convergent”: you want to narrow the field in 
order to select the most promising things for 
whatever comes next.”
   Gamestorming 
Dave Gray, Sunni Brown and James Macanufo
 

13
Structure
A FACILITATOR’S HANDBOOK
The Diamond of Participation 
A more detailed version of the Diamond of Participation. 
EMERGENCE
?
CONVERGENCE
DIVERGENCE
BRAINSTORM
Find new ideas
Work with new people
!
STRENGTHEN 
GOOD IDEAS
Make good decisions
BRAINSTORM
LEARN
FEAR
CONFLICT
JUDGEMENT
GROAN  ZONE
FRUSTRATION
STUCK
CONTROLLING
QUITTING
EXHAUSTED
DISCOVER
MAKE PROPOSALS
MAKE DECISIONS

A FACILITATOR’S HANDBOOK
14
There are thousands of activities that a 
facilitator can choose from, adapt and 
combine. Many resources are available 
online.
This section is therefore not attempting to be comprehensive, 
but to give a selection of more general activities that can be 
used in many meetings and workshops.
A variety of ways to engage, how would this group like  
to engage? 
Check-ins and check-outs
In a typical check-in, the facilitator will give a prompt question 
and everyone in the group answers in turn. This might be as 
simple as sharing their name and role, but there are many 
possibilities.
Check-ins and check-outs are deceptively powerful tools to 
create more inclusive and productive meetings. Check-ins 
can help participants to ‘arrive’ at the meeting, give everyone 
the chance to speak straight away (even if briefly), help the 
group to hear everyone and see patterns, and start to get 
people thinking about the subject matter of the meeting. A 
check-in is also useful for giving the facilitator an indication 
of what the group is thinking and feeling, and whether the 
meeting plan might need to change with this in mind.
As with all parts of a meeting, it helps to have a clear purpose 
in mind for the check-in when deciding how to run it. This will 
help with the choice of tone (fun or reflective), length (one 
word each or five minutes), prompting question (related or 
unrelated to the agenda), and whether to keep everyone 
together or put people in pairs or breakout groups. 
‘Check-in Success’ have a very long list of questions that 
can be used for check-ins as well as giving guidance on what, 
why, when and how.
You can be creative with check-ins. For example, instead 
of asking people how they are feeling, you can ask people 
to draw, share a movement or dance move, or an object in 
the room, or share a metaphor or image. It can help to give 
everyone 30 seconds to reflect on their answer and write 
it down before anyone starts sharing. That way, they are not 
scrambling to come up with a profound answer instead of 
listening.
An alternative to a whole group check-in is to put people in 
pairs or trios and ask them to discuss a prompt question. This 
can give each person longer to speak without the check-in 
taking longer. It can also help build relationships, especially in 
a newly forming group. The Liberating Structure Impromptu 
Networking is one way to do this.
Check-outs work on a similar principle at the end of a 
meeting. Having been through a shared experience, each 
person can share what they are taking away, what they have 
learnt or whatever else serves the purpose of closing the 
gathering. This can also be an opportunity to get feedback on 
the meeting and for people to commit to next steps. The Fun 
Retrospectives website has several creative ideas for check-
out activities.
Chat waves
One way of doing a check-in or check-out online is a  
chat wave.
Pose a question to participants and give them less than a 
minute to write an answer in the chatbox (it could be only a 
few seconds). Tell them to hold off pressing ‘send’ until you 
give the instruction. You’ll see a wonderful flurry of messages 
emerge all at once. You can repeat this with a few questions in 
a row to make the most of momentum.
A chat wave works especially well at the beginning or end of 
a session — for example, to get people warmed up or to get 
feedback. You can see some fascinating patterns emerge. If 
you were in person, it would be impossible to get input from 
everyone at once in a way that everyone can go back and 
review straight afterwards.
Activities

15
Activities
A FACILITATOR’S HANDBOOK
Creating the container
When a group is coming together for the first time, starting 
a new project or embarking on a more contentious 
conversation, it can help to identify from the beginning how 
they would like to work together. This is sometimes known as 
‘creating the container’ for open, honest conversations, or in 
coaching as ‘designing the team alliance’.
Some questions to guide this discussion include:
•	How do we want to be together in this space?
•	What is the culture / atmosphere you want to  
create together?
•	How do we want to be together when things  
get difficult? 
•	What conversation superpowers do you have?  
What will you take responsibility for?
You can cover these questions one by one and ask people to 
write on post-its or just name what is top of their mind. The 
aim is to have a short list of behaviours and principles that the 
group agrees on and commits to. This should be displayed 
somewhere the group can see and refer back to throughout 
the meeting and in future meetings. The facilitator can ask 
the group at different stages to what extent they see the 
agreement in action and what might need to change.
Asking questions
While questions don’t quite count as an activity, there is 
a good reason why many books on facilitation include a 
section on them. They are an essential part of the facilitator’s 
toolkit. There is a skill to choosing the right question and 
asking it in a way that has the desired effect, whether that is 
to help the group to learn, to see more clearly, to open up the 
conversation, to see things from a different angle or to make a 
difficult choice.
“A beautiful question is an ambitious yet 
actionable question that can begin to shift the 
way we perceive or think about something—
and that might serve as a catalyst to bring 
about change.”
  A Beautiful Question 
Warren Berger
“Ask obvious questions: 
The Facilitator needs to say “Why?” a lot and 
ask questions to which everybody already 
knows the answer. Covering the obvious 
ensures there’s no misinterpretation, and it 
often draws out important details that not 
everyone knows about.”
  Sprint 
Jake Knapp
“When people are getting too caught up in 
the details, spark the imagination and bring 
them up a level with some experimental 
questions. If they are up in the clouds and 
need a bit of grounding, bring them down 
with some examining questions.”
   Gamestorming 
Dave Gray, Sunni Brown and James Macanufo
One of the most difficult skills to learn is to not answer your 
own questions! It takes practice to get comfortable with 
awkward silences and avoid filling the space by talking. A few 
extra awkward seconds give the group time to think. If you 
can’t hold back, you can ask the question again and wait a 
bit longer. If you are working remotely, it can help to put the 
question in the chat box as you ask it.
“Used after a facilitator asked a question 
of the group, W.H.A.L.E. (which stood for 
[...] Wait, Hesitate, Ask [again], Listen, 
then Explain) was to prevent facilitators 
from answering their own questions, and 
subsequently dominating the discussion they 
were there to lead.
   Unlocking the Magic of Facilitation  
Sam Killermann and  Meg Bolger

16
Activities
A FACILITATOR’S HANDBOOK
Thinking alone, thinking together
One of the simplest but most helpful patterns you can help 
when facilitating is to give people the chance to think alone 
and think together. 
Who speaks first  in a group matters. It sets the tone for the 
rest of a conversation. Even where others disagree, they are 
still responding to the original idea. When people are given 
time to think individually before sharing, it becomes less likely 
that brainstorming is dominated by the typically loud voices 
who always speak first. 
Even better, you can add one or two extra stages between 
thinking alone and sharing with the whole group. 1-2-4-all is a 
Liberating Structure where:
•	People reflect individually on a question for one minute
•	They discuss in pairs for two minutes, building on ideas 
from self-reflection
•	They discuss in fours (a pair of pairs) for four minutes, 
building on the ideas from the pairs, noticing similarities 
and differences
•	Each group shares one idea that stood out from their 
conversation (i.e. not a report back of the whole 
conversation!). Five minutes is given for this.
This simple pattern allows for individual and group thinking to 
be shared with the whole group in just twelve minutes.
This is a bit more fiddly for virtual meetings as it requires 
manually moving pairs together in breakout rooms, but it’s 
very much possible. One option to simplify is ‘think, pair, 
share’, removing the ‘fours’ stage.
Question storming
Question storming is a particular form of brainstorming where, 
instead of ideas, you generate questions together. This can be 
especially useful in the opening, divergent stage of a meeting. 
By generating a large number of questions, combining them 
and choosing which are the most important to answer, or 
identifying which need to be answered first, you can set an 
agenda for the rest of a workshop
There is no set way of doing this but typically, the facilitator 
will set a topic and then the participants will have some time 
to individually come up with a lot of questions about the topic, 
often on post-it notes. These are then clustered together to 
reveal common themes and some of the questions are then 
combined and improved. A final stage might be voting on 
which questions to answer next, or ordering questions by what 
stage of a process they might be answered.

17
Activities
A FACILITATOR’S HANDBOOK
Liberating Structures
Liberating Structures are 33 structures for meetings and 
gatherings that enable high levels of participation, unleash 
creativity and help a group work towards an outcome. Several 
of them feature elsewhere in this handbook. They can help 
with everything from peer learning to crowdsourcing and 
choosing between ideas. They can last anywhere from ten 
minutes to multiple days and are designed to work well with 
each other in a sequence.
They are open source and instructions for each of them are 
available on the website. They are therefore an excellent way 
to learn to be a better facilitator. 

A FACILITATOR’S HANDBOOK
18
Facilitating virtually presents some extra challenges. 
For example, without the additional visual, bodily and 
environmental cues, it’s harder to pick up on what is unsaid 
and unasked. And the addition of having to worry about 
technology means even more multi-tasking.
This means that a good meeting takes more preparation 
because it’s more difficult to adjust on the fly. We have to think 
through and prepare for multiple scenarios. We need multiple 
people to facilitate and do technical support.
However, there are also opportunities from more people 
being able to participate – both due to not having to travel and 
by being able to share simultaneously through technology.
Planning for a virtual meeting
As seen in the example table, as well as the normal planning 
for the timing, content and purpose of each section, we need 
to think about the technical host role in advance. Doing this 
enables a much smoother experience for participants.
Time 
Content
Purpose
Tech Host
12:00
(x mins)
Section title (name of person 
leading this section)
Plan for the section including:
•	Content to share
•	Questions to ask
•	Relevant timings
•	Precise instructions for  
any activities.
You should be able to name the 
purpose of each section. This will 
help you see the flow across the 
session.	
E.g. what break-out rooms, how 
many, # people, # minutes
What to paste into the chat
Links to share - e.g. to Mural, 
Google Docs
Virtual tips and tools

19
Virtual Tips and Tools
A FACILITATOR’S HANDBOOK
Using Zoom break-out rooms
Breakout rooms are an important part of many online 
meetings and workshops. Here are some resources to get you 
started:
•	An essential first step is to switch on the breakout rooms 
feature on in your Zoom settings.
•	Zoom has a quite comprehensive guide to breakout 
rooms including more recent features.
You can use breakout rooms in many ways including:
•	At the beginning of a session, split people into pairs for a 
few minutes to respond to a prompt together.  
Then repeat with different pairs. This is the essence of 
impromptu networking and gets people used to being 
whisked away to breakout rooms.
•	Give a group of 4–6 people longer to talk and go 
deeper into a topic in a Conversation Cafe format.  
For this one, you’ll need to give clear instructions in 
advance in the chat and/or on a slide.
•	Give groups a task to do together and ask them to 
record their ideas on a slide.
•	You can even replicate an Open Space session (or a 
party) by enabling people to move themselves between 
breakout rooms.
It’s highly recommended to paste questions and exercises into 
the chat before you send people into breakout rooms. That 
way, they don’t have to remember what you just said. In fact, 
this is helpful even if people aren’t going into breakout rooms.
Note that you may need to update your Zoom to the latest 
version in order to make the most of the new features.
Using online platforms
There are many choices for places to write together including 
(roughly in order of speed of set-up) Google JamBoards 
(great for sticky notes), Google Slides and bespoke tools like 
Miro and Mural.
When choosing between tools, consider how easy it is for 
people to get started — do they need to sign up for an account 
or learn a whole new interface? — as well as the features you 
need. This blog post is a helpful guide for choosing tools.
Make sure to give yourself time to set things up in advance 
if you’re using slides. Make sure the document is shared (for 
viewing and/or editing) and has a title that makes it obvious 
what it is. Clearly label where people should be writing. 
If you’ve got 50 break-out groups, you’ll need 50 places 
to write. And beware of exceeding participants’ technical 
capability: Zoom video, chat and breakout rooms plus writing 
in another window is a lot to handle all at once.
Platforms like Mural and Miro have a host of guides online 
to get you started. However, giving yourself 20-30 minutes 
to just go on the platform, maybe with a colleague, and click 
around on all the buttons will help you learn quickly. It’s highly 
unlikely that you’ll break the internet!
The tech host role and co-facilitation
It works so much better to work as a pair (or more) when 
hosting a virtual meeting. It’s impossible for you to be looking 
at people’s faces, checking for questions in the chat, preparing 
the next set of breakout rooms and sharing links for slides, all 
while giving the next set of instructions and listening intently. 
When facilitating alone, it’s easy to miss what someone has 
said because you’re fiddling with some settings or copying 
and pasting some text. With co-hosts, you can plan in advance 
who will be speaking in different parts of a meeting and who 
will be the technical producer.
The real value of working with someone else, though, is that 
they see your blind spots and together you’ll come up with a 
much better meeting plan than you would by yourself.
If you are facilitating on your own, you can still spread out the 
work by asking others to take responsibility for timekeeping, 
note-taking and being the rabbit hole monitor.

A FACILITATOR’S HANDBOOK
20
Expect things to take longer
A delay while someone installs Zoom. A poor internet 
connection when housemates are watching Netflix. 
Confusion from instructions not quite being clear. There are 
all sorts of reasons for delays in virtual meetings. Rather than 
feeling anxious that the time you’re spending together isn’t 
‘productive’, remember that there is plenty of slack in in-
person meetings too.
Often, we need to go slow to go fast. It’s tempting to skip over 
a check-in at the beginning of the meeting or to shorten the 
break from ten to five minutes but it’ll catch up with us later 
when it hasn’t been made clear from the start that everyone 
should be participating or we run out of steam. It is also 
important to make time for introducing the technology if you 
are using something like Mural or Miro.
We need to plan for things to take longer than they would in 
person and be patient in the moment. Keep it human. Take 
time to breathe and for people to reflect by themselves. Allow 
for moments of levity and connection. Notice where there’s 
disagreement and lean into it; it might not be the conversation 
you expected to happen, but it might be the conversation that 
needs to happen for things to move forward.
We may prefer to connect with others and have difficult 
conversations face-to-face but while that’s not an option, we 
need to get good at doing this virtually.
Splitting up long meetings into shorter chunks can help 
us better work with the energy of the participants; virtual 
meetings can be exhausting! Instead of a half-day workshop, 
have three 90-minute sessions. When people have to travel, it 
makes sense to lump a whole process together for the sake of 
efficiency. This constraint is absent for virtual meetings.

21
Becoming a better facilitator
A FACILITATOR’S HANDBOOK
What to practise
The best ways to learn to facilitate are to experience, 
experiment, get feedback, reflect, learn and repeat.
Being a good facilitator isn’t about having an arsenal of 
activities or flurry of frameworks. Facilitation is a skill that 
can be learned and practised. Like getting better at playing 
an instrument or a sport, it helps to break things down into 
elements that can be practised more deliberately.
Here are some ideas for what to practise:
•	Giving clear instructions. Write them out and practise 
saying them. Maybe test them with someone else.
•	Asking effective and creative questions. Try this in 
conversation and in meetings. Notice how people 
respond and what happens as a result.
•	Thinking through scenarios. Come up with a few 
different ways a meeting could unfold. It might help to 
consider how you could close the session well so there 
are some next steps even if you haven’t got to the place 
you intended.
•	Judging how much time is needed and adjusting to 
changing circumstances. Reflect back on meetings 
where you are facilitating and also those where you 
are a participant. Where did the agenda slip? Did the 
agenda go as planned? Should there have been more 
of an adjustment? What could have been shortened 
or dropped? Trying improvisational acting or comedy 
(known as ‘improv’) can also help you to respond 
creatively in the moment.
•	Listening and observation skills. Listen right to the end of 
what people are saying rather than auto-completing while 
you think about how you will respond. Ask yourself during 
a meeting, what’s the emotional field? How’s the energy of 
the room?
•	Working with emotion and conflict. Use mindfulness to 
recognise when you are getting caught up in a wave of 
emotion. It can help to have a trusted co-facilitator for 
these moments. It can help to take a breath, maybe give 
the group a break to cool down, go for a walk and/or have 
a stretch.
How and where to practise 
“You won’t discover and invent anything 
unless you get used to taking risks and trying 
new things on a regular basis. Make it a 
practice to try at least one new thing every 
time you gamestorm.”
   Gamestorming 
Dave Gray, Sunni Brown and James Macanufo
Find opportunities to try stuff out in a safe space. This could be 
in a small internal meeting with trusted colleagues. Testing out 
ideas in this low-stakes context gives you the space to make 
mistakes and also to give you the confidence to try things out 
elsewhere.
Ask for feedback at the end of each session you facilitate 
about what people appreciated and what they would like to be 
different. You could ask a colleague ahead of the meeting that 
you would like them to give you feedback afterwards.
Finally, find opportunities to be well-facilitated. For 
example, you can find virtual workshops that promise to be 
participatory. Notice how it feels to be a participant in this  
sort of space.
Becoming a better  
facilitator

22
Becoming a better facilitator
A FACILITATOR’S HANDBOOK
Resources
If you are stuck with a facilitation problem, Google is your 
friend! There are many facilitation resources online such as 
this website dedicated to check-ins.
The The Liberating Structures community organises a bunch 
of workshops that are free to join. This includes opportunities 
to learn how to apply different structures online. You can join 
the Slack group to meet people offering their expertise for 
free, and look at this guide to using Liberating Structures 
virtually.
The Rees McCann website offers a lot of advice on virtual 
facilitation, including free guides, a helpful newsletter and 
some free workshops.
If you prefer listening to reading, the Conversation Factory 
podcast hosted by Daniel Stillman can provide a lot of 
inspiration.
Books on facilitation
•	The Art of Gathering: How We Meet and Why is 
Matters by Priya Parker
•	A Beautiful Question: The Power of Inquiry to 
Spark Breakthrough Ideas by Warren Berger
•	Compassionate Conversations: How to Speak and 
Listen from the Heart by Diane Musho Hamilton, 
Gabriel Menegale Wilson, and Kimberly Myosai Loh
•	The Doodle Revolution: Unlock the Power to Think 
Differently by Sunni Brown
•	Gamestorming: A Playbook for Innovators, 
Rulebreakers, and Changemakers by Dave Gray, 
Sunni Brown, and James Macanufo
•	Good Talk: How to Design Conversations that 
Matter by Daniel Stillman
•	The Skilled Facilitator by Roger Schwarz
•	Sprint: How to Solve Big Problems and Test New 
Ideas in Just Five Days by Jake Knapp
•	Unlocking the Magic of Facilitation: 11 Key 
Concepts You Didn’t Know You Didn’t Know by Sam 
Killermann and  Meg Bolger
Guides to virtual facilitation
•	Online Learning – What we’ve learnt so far.  
Nicole Barling-Luke 
•	Five Ways to be More Intentional with Virtual Meetings 
- Jamie Pett
•	A how-to guide for virtual facilitation and collaboration 
with remote groups - Collective Mind
•	The Definitive Guide to Facilitating Remote Workshops 
- Mural

23
Becoming a better facilitator
A FACILITATOR’S HANDBOOK
APPENDIX: Document URLs
For use with non-digital versions of this handbook.
page
content
URL
6
A how-to guide for virtual facilitation 
and collaboration with remote groups
https://bit.ly/remote-groups
7
Conversation Design template
www.mural.co/templates/conversation-design
Liberating Structures website
www.liberatingstructures.com
14
Check-in questions
https://checkinsuccess.com/question-archive/
Fun Retrospectives: check-out activities
www.funretrospectives.com/category/check-out/
16
Liberating Structures: 1-1-2-4-all
www.liberatingstructures.com/1-1-2-4-all/
Question storming: A guide for 
brainstorming questions
www.maxjoles.com/blog/question-storming
17
Liberating Structures
www.liberatingstructures.com
Liberating Structures instructions
www.liberatingstructures.com/ls/
19
Zoom: Getting started with  
breakout rooms
https://bit.ly/zoom-breakoutrooms
All you need to know about using Zoom 
breakout rooms
https://blog.zoom.us/using-zoom-breakout-rooms/
Liberating Structures:  
Conversation Café
www.liberatingstructures.com/17-conversation-cafe/
Choosing tools
https://bit.ly/choose-tools
Mural: getting started
https://bit.ly/Mural-gettingstarted
Miro: getting started
https://bit.ly/Miro-gettingstarted
Rabbit-hole monitor: Beth Kanter
https://bethkanter.org/elmo-technique/
22
Liberating Structures community
www.liberatingstructures.com
Slack Group  
(create acount / sign-in required)
https://liberatingstructures.slack.com/
Guide to using Liberating Structures 
virtually
https://virtual-liberating-structures.gdes.app/virtual-ls
Rees McCann website
https://reesmccann.com
The Conversation Factory podcast
https://theconversationfactory.com/podcast
Online learning — what we’ve learnt so 
far: Nichole Barling Luke
https://bit.ly/online-learning-sofar
Five ways to be more intentional with 
virtual meetings: Jamie Pett
https://bit.ly/five-ways-virtual
A how-to guide for virtual facilitation 
and collaboration with remote groups: 
Collective Mind
https://bit.ly/remote-groups
The definitive guide to facilitating 
remote workshops: Mural
www.suddenlyremote.co

A FACILITATOR’S HANDBOOK
24
Principles of Facilitation
in partnership with
Produced by
Curiosity Society
We help organisations make a better world, by using learning 
and design to change systems. 
We have a new imagination of the world. One in which the 
impact on people and the planet is re-connected into the way 
organisations make their decisions. One in which positive 
conversations between funders and change-makers mean 
that money is aligned with the mission of organisations and 
their values. And one in which everyone understands how 
their contributions influence the systems we collectively  
seek to change.
Come and see us at www.curiositysociety.org
Jamie Pett 
Jamie Pett is an Associate at the Curiosity Society. He aims 
to create the conditions for equitable change to happen in 
complex systems through facilitation, research, coaching 
and network weaving. Jamie is also a freelance consultant, 
Co-Chair of the board of RESULTS UK, and founder of 
the London International Development Network. He has 
previously worked with the Overseas Development Institute, 
the Zanzibar Planning Commission and the Foreign, 
Commonwealth and Development Office.
Active Gloucestershire
We believe that physical activity can have a transformative 
impact on the lives of people and their communities and we 
have a vision for everyone in Gloucestershire to be active 
every day.
We are part of a national network of Active Partnerships 
operating across England and we are the co-ordinating 
charity behind the county-owned movement we can move.   
At our essence we are about driving positive change.
www.activegloucestershire.org
we can move
Join we can move and our approach to being physically 
active. We’re people, influencers and leaders across our 
communities. Collectively working together to encourage 
more people to lead more active and healthier lives.
https://wecanmove.net
