


RIVERHEAD BOOKS
An imprint of Penguin Random House LLC
375 Hudson Street
New York, New York 10014
Copyright © 2018 by Priya Parker
Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes free speech, and creates a vibrant
culture. Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this book and for complying with copyright laws by not reproducing,
scanning, or distributing any part of it in any form without permission. You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin to
continue to publish books for every reader.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Parker, Priya, author.
Title: The art of gathering: how we meet and why it matters / Priya Parker.
Description: New York: Riverhead Books, 2018.
Identifiers: LCCN 2017058605| ISBN 9781594634925 (hardback) | ISBN 9780698410879 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Self-actualization (Psychology) | Interpersonal relations. | BISAC: SELF-HELP / Personal Growth / General. |
BUSINESS & ECONOMICS / Leadership. | PSYCHOLOGY / Interpersonal Relations.
Classification: LCC BF637.S4 P357 2018 | DDC 302/.1—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017058605
Version_1

For my Anand, who shows me daily the true meaning of awing and
honoring

Contents
•       •       •
TITLE PAGE
COPYRIGHT
DEDICATION
INTRODUCTION
One  DECIDE WHY YOU’RE REALLY GATHERING
Two  CLOSE DOORS
Three  DON’T BE A CHILL HOST
Four  CREATE A TEMPORARY ALTERNATIVE WORLD
Five  NEVER START A FUNERAL WITH LOGISTICS
Six  KEEP YOUR BEST SELF OUT OF MY GATHERING
Seven  CAUSE GOOD CONTROVERSY
Eight  ACCEPT THAT THERE IS AN END
NOTES
INDEX
ABOUT THE AUTHOR

T
Introduction
•       •       •
he way we gather matters. Gatherings consume our days and help
determine the kind of world we live in, in both our intimate and
public realms. Gathering—the conscious bringing together of people
for a reason—shapes the way we think, feel, and make sense of our world.
Lawgivers have understood, perhaps as well as anyone, the power inherent
in gatherings. In democracies, the freedom to assemble is one of the
foundational rights granted to every individual. In countries descending into
authoritarianism, one of the first things to go is the right to assemble. Why?
Because of what can happen when people come together, exchange
information, inspire one another, test out new ways of being together. And
yet most of us spend very little time thinking about the actual ways in
which we gather.
We spend our lives gathering—first in our families, then in
neighborhoods and playgroups, schools and churches, and then in meetings,
weddings, town halls, conferences, birthday parties, product launches,
board meetings, class and family reunions, dinner parties, trade fairs, and
funerals. And we spend much of that time in uninspiring, underwhelming
moments that fail to capture us, change us in any way, or connect us to one
another.
Any number of studies support a notion that’s obvious to many of us:
Much of the time we spend in gatherings with other people disappoints us.
“With the occasional exception, my mood in conferences usually swings
between boredom, despair, and rage,” Duncan Green, a blogger and
specialist in international development, confesses in the Guardian. Green’s
take isn’t unique to conferences: The 2015 State of Enterprise Work survey
found that “wasteful meetings” were employees’ top obstacle to getting
work done.

We don’t even seem to be thrilled with the time we spend with our
friends. A 2013 study, The State of Friendship in America 2013: A Crisis of
Confidence, found that 75 percent of respondents were unsatisfied with
those relationships. Meanwhile, in How We Gather, a recent report on the
spiritual life of young people, Angie Thurston and Casper ter Kuile write,
“As traditional religion struggles to attract young people, millennials are
looking elsewhere with increasing urgency.”
As much as our gatherings disappoint us, though, we tend to keep
gathering in the same tired ways. Most of us remain on autopilot when we
bring people together, following stale formulas, hoping that the chemistry
of a good meeting, conference, or party will somehow take care of itself,
that thrilling results will magically emerge from the usual staid inputs. It is
almost always a vain hope.
When we do seek out gathering advice, we almost always turn to those
who are focused on the mechanics of gathering: chefs, etiquette experts,
floral artists, event planners. By doing so, we inadvertently shrink a human
challenge down to a logistical one. We reduce the question of what to do
with people to a question of what to do about things: PowerPoints,
invitations, AV equipment, cutlery, refreshments. We are tempted to focus
on the “stuff” of gatherings because we believe those are the only details we
can control. I believe that’s both shortsighted and a misunderstanding about
what actually makes a group connect and a gathering matter.
I come to gatherings not as a chef or an event planner, but as someone
trained in group dialogue and conflict resolution. I’ve spent much of the
past fifteen years of my life studying, designing, and advising gatherings
whose goals were to be transformative for the people involved and the
communities they were trying to affect. Today I work as a professional
facilitator. Though there are many of us around, you may have never heard
of us. A facilitator is someone trained in the skill of shaping group
dynamics and collective conversations. My job is to put the right people in
a room and help them to collectively think, dream, argue, heal, envision,
trust, and connect for a specific larger purpose. My lens on gathering—and
the lens I want to share with you—places people and what happens between
them at the center of every coming together.
In my work, I strive to help people experience a sense of belonging. This
probably has something to do with the fact that I have spent my own life
trying to figure out where and to whom I belong. I come on my mother’s

side from Indian cow worshippers in Varanasi, an ancient city known as the
spiritual center of India, and on my father’s side from American cow
slaughterers in South Dakota. To cut a very long story short, my parents met
in Iowa, fell in love, married, had me in Zimbabwe, worked in fishing
villages across Africa and Asia, fell out of love, divorced in Virginia, and
went their separate ways. Both of them went on to remarry, finding spouses
more of their own world and worldview. After the divorce, I moved every
two weeks between my mother’s and father’s households—toggling back
and forth between a vegetarian, liberal, incense-filled, Buddhist-Hindu-New
Age universe and a meat-eating, conservative, twice-a-week-churchgoing,
evangelical Christian realm. So it was perhaps inevitable that I ended up in
the field of conflict resolution.
I discovered that field in college when I became interested in, and
anguished by, the state of race relations at the University of Virginia. Upon
graduating, I worked in communities—in the United States and abroad—to
train leaders in a group dialogue process called Sustained Dialogue. It is a
gathering technique that aims to transform fractured relationships across
racial, ethnic, and religious lines. Through that work, I became fascinated
with what occurs when people attempt to come together across difference.
In the years since, I have applied the methods of conflict resolution in a
variety of settings and to a great variety of problems. I’ve run meetings in
five-star hotels, in public parks, on dirt floors, and in college dorm rooms.
I’ve led sessions with villagers in western India grappling with how to
rebuild their community after ethnic riots and with Zimbabwean activists
fighting the threat of a government shutdown of their NGOs. I’ve worked
on dialogues between Arab opposition leaders and their European and
American counterparts to explore the relationship between Islam and
democracy. I’ve designed gatherings for state and federal officials in the
United States to figure out how to revitalize a national poverty program for
a new generation. I’ve facilitated gatherings for technology companies,
architecture firms, beauty brands, and financial institutions, helping them
hold complicated, difficult discussions about their future.
I live in New York City, where people gather a lot. I am often a host and
often a guest, and in both roles I am endlessly intrigued by the small and
important interventions we can all make to help groups gel. Among my
friends and relatives, I am the person people text or call with questions like
“Should my work dinner have a guided conversation around a question, or

should we just let people chat?” and “How should we handle the one
blabbermouth church volunteer?” How, a half-Muslim, half-Christian
immigrant friend asked me, might she come up with her own version of a
Jewish shiva to mark the death of her father in Germany with friends in
New York who never knew him?
In all my gatherings, whether a board meeting or a birthday party, I have
come to believe that it is the way a group is gathered that determines what
happens in it and how successful it is, the little design choices you can
make to help your gathering soar. So The Art of Gathering is part journey
and part guidebook. It is for anyone who has ever wondered how to take an
ordinary moment with others and make it unforgettable—and meaningful.
My hope is that this book will help you think differently about your
gatherings. I have organized the chapters to reflect the sequence that I walk
my clients and friends through, and that I employ myself, when designing a
meaningful event. Though there are certainly some principles that I believe
apply to even the simplest of gatherings, you need not follow every
suggestion or step in this book. You are the best person to decide what will
be helpful for you and what makes sense in the context of your gatherings.
This book is based on my own experience and ideas, both what I know
has worked and what I know hasn’t. Yet because gathering is inherently a
collective endeavor, I’ve also interviewed more than one hundred other
gatherers to learn their secrets and test my own ideas. My conversations
with conference organizers, event planners, circus choreographers, Quaker
meeting clerks, camp counselors, funeral directors, DJs, auctioneers,
competitive wingsuit flying-formation instructors, rabbis, coaches, choir
conductors, performance artists, comedians, game designers, Japanese tea
ceremony masters, TV directors, professional photographers, family wealth
advisers, and fundraisers have all informed the ideas here. I intentionally
draw from a wide variety of gatherings—museums, classrooms, partner
meetings, birthday parties, summer camps, and even funerals—to illustrate
the creativity that people use regardless of the context, and I hope it inspires
you to do the same. All the stories that follow are true, though I have
changed some identifying names, details, and locations of events and
people for private gatherings. Among the variety of people I spoke with,
they all shared one crucial trait: a fascination with what happens when
people come together.
As I send you off into these pages, let me declare my bias up front:

I believe that everyone has the ability to gather well.
You don’t have to be an extrovert. In fact, some of the best gatherers I
know suffer from social anxiety.
You don’t need to be a boss or a manager.
You don’t need a fancy house.
The art of gathering, fortunately, doesn’t rest on your charisma or the
quality of your jokes. (I would be in trouble if it did.)
Gatherings crackle and flourish when real thought goes into them, when
(often invisible) structure is baked into them, and when a host has the
curiosity, willingness, and generosity of spirit to try.
Let’s begin.

W
One
Decide Why You’re Really Gathering
•       •       •
hy do we gather?
We gather to solve problems we can’t solve on our own. We
gather to celebrate, to mourn, and to mark transitions. We gather
to make decisions. We gather because we need one another. We gather to
show strength. We gather to honor and acknowledge. We gather to build
companies and schools and neighborhoods. We gather to welcome, and we
gather to say goodbye.
But here is the great paradox of gathering: There are so many good
reasons for coming together that often we don’t know precisely why we are
doing so. You are not alone if you skip the first step in convening people
meaningfully: committing to a bold, sharp purpose.
When we skip this step, we often let old or faulty assumptions about
why we gather dictate the form of our gatherings. We end up gathering in
ways that don’t serve us, or not connecting when we ought to.
In our offices, we spend our days in back-to-back meetings, many of
which could be replaced with an email or a ten-minute stand-up meeting. In
college, we stare at the floor in lecture halls, when the same facts would be
better conveyed via video and the professor’s time would be better spent
coaching students on specific difficulties with the material. In the nonprofit
world, it is customary to throw galas for causes because that is what
nonprofits do, even if they don’t raise much more than they cost.
And yet at moments when we could benefit from gathering—to
determine how to make a neighborhood park safe again, to strategize with a
friend and think through ways to help her struggling career, to rebuild focus
after a particularly brutal sales cycle—we don’t think to gather, or are too
busy to, or, in the modern way, we don’t want to ask people for their time.

So widespread is this desire not to impose that a growing number of people
report not wanting any funeral at all when they die.
In short, our thinking about gathering—when we gather and why—has
become muddled. When we do gather, we too often use a template of
gathering (what we assume a gathering should look like) to substitute for
our thinking. The art of gathering begins with purpose: When should we
gather? And why?
A CATEGORY IS NOT A PURPOSE
Think back to the last several gatherings you hosted or attended. A
networking event. A book club. A volunteer training. If I were to ask you
(or your host) the purpose behind each of those gatherings, I wouldn’t be
surprised to hear what I often do in my work: what you were supposed to do
at the gathering.
That networking night, you might tell me, was intended to help people
in similar fields meet one another.
The book club was organized to get us to read a book together.
The volunteer training was arranged to train the volunteers.
The purpose of your church’s small group was to allow church members
to meet in smaller groups.
This is the circular logic that guides the planning of many of our
gatherings.
“What’s wrong with that?” you might say. Isn’t the purpose of a
networking night to network? Yes, to a point. But if that’s all it is, it will
likely proceed like so many other networking nights: people wandering
around and awkwardly passing out their business cards, practicing their
elevator pitches on anyone with a pulse who’ll listen. It will likely not
dazzle anyone. It may even make some guests feel awkward or insecure—
and swear off future networking nights.
When we don’t examine the deeper assumptions behind why we gather,
we end up skipping too quickly to replicating old, staid formats of
gathering. And we forgo the possibility of creating something memorable,
even transformative.

For example, in planning that networking night, what if the organizers
paused to ask questions like these: Is our purpose for this gathering to help
people find business partners or clients? Is the purpose to help guests sell
their wares or to get advice on the weaker parts of their product? Is the
purpose of the night to help as many people from different fields make as
many new connections as possible, or to build a tribe that would want to
meet again? The answers to these questions should lead to very different
formats of an evening.
When we gather, we often make the mistake of conflating category with
purpose. We outsource our decisions and our assumptions about our
gatherings to people, formats, and contexts that are not our own. We get
lulled into the false belief that knowing the category of the gathering—the
board meeting, workshop, birthday party, town hall—will be instructive to
designing it. But we often choose the template—and the activities and
structure that go along with it—before we’re clear on our purpose. And we
do this just as much for gatherings that are as low stakes as a networking
night as for gatherings that are as high stakes as a court trial.
The Red Hook Community Justice Center, located in Brooklyn, New
York, set out to reimagine one of the more intimidating gatherings in public
life: the court proceeding. Founded in 2000, in the wake of a crisis, in a
neighborhood struggling with poverty and crime, the center wanted to
change the relationship between the community and law enforcement. Its
founders wondered if it was possible to invent a new kind of justice system
that would cure the ailments that a crime revealed instead of just locking up
criminals.
The judge who would come to preside over Red Hook’s experiment,
Alex Calabrese, once described himself as having two options under the
traditional justice system: “It was either prosecute or dismiss.” Even judges
who recognized the problems with the system didn’t have much freedom to
break out of this paradigm. And so a small group of organizers concluded
that, in order to change how the justice system functioned in Red Hook,
they would need to invent a new kind of gathering. To do so, they would
have to ask themselves a basic question: What is the purpose of the justice
system we want to see? And what would a court look like if it were built
according to that purpose?
A traditional courtroom is adversarial. That is a design that derives from
its own very worthy purpose: surfacing the truth by letting the parties

haggle over it. But the organizers behind the Red Hook Community Justice
Center were motivated by a different purpose. Would it be possible to use a
courtroom to get everyone involved in a case—the accused, judges,
lawyers, clerks, social workers, community members—to help improve
behavior instead of merely punish it? “We take a problem-solving approach
to the cases that come before us,” said Amanda Berman, the Justice
Center’s project director and a former public defender in the Bronx. “When
we’re presented with a case—whether it’s a housing-court case, a criminal-
court case, or a family-court case—the question we are asking at the end of
the day is, what is the problem, and how can we work together to come to a
solution?”
This new purpose required the design of a new kind of courtroom. A
traditional courtroom, built for surfacing the truth adversarially, was
constructed to make the judge seem intimidating. It separated the
prosecutors from the defense counsel. It featured grim-faced jailers and
sympathetic social workers and psychologists. Everyone had their role.
Even the décor reinforced the purpose. “Traditional courtrooms often utilize
dark woods, conveying a message of gravity, judgment, and power,”
Berman said.
The experimental courtroom in Red Hook was created along very
different lines. Set up in an abandoned parochial school in the heart of the
neighborhood, the court has windows to let the sun in, light-colored wood,
and an unusual judge’s bench. “The planners chose to build the bench at eye
level so that the judge could have these personal interactions with litigants
coming before him, invite them up to the bench, which he loves to do, so
that people could see that he is not looking down on them, both literally and
figuratively,” Berman said.
Calabrese is the judge. His experimental courtroom has jurisdiction over
three police precincts that used to send cases to three different courts—civil
court, family court, and criminal court—and now sends many to Calabrese.
He personally presides over every case that comes in, taking the time to get
to know its history and players. In many cases, a defendant is assigned a
social worker, who does a full clinical assessment of the accused to figure
out the bigger picture of his or her life. This holistic assessment—which can
take place even prior to the initial court appearance—includes looking for
substance abuse, mental health issues, trauma, domestic violence, and other
factors. This assessment is then shared with the judge, the district attorney,

and the defense. At the proceeding itself, Calabrese behaves more like a
strict, caring uncle than a traditional judge. He verifies the details of the
case and checks errors in front of the defendants. He takes the time to
address each individual personally, often shaking their hand as they
approach the bench. He explains their situation to them carefully: “The fine
print says if you don’t come through, they will come and evict you, and no
one wants to see that happen, so I’ve written ‘12/30’ in big numbers on the
top of the page.” You have the sense that the people here are rooting for
defendants and litigants to get their lives in order. It’s not uncommon for
Calabrese to praise a defendant who has shown progress. “Obviously, this is
a good result for you. It’s also a great result for the community, and I’d like
to give you a round of applause,” he might say. And then you see everyone,
even the police officers, applauding.
Under the rules of this special court, Judge Calabrese has available to
him a diverse toolkit of possible interventions. In addition to traditional
prison time, which he metes out when need be, he has the ability to evaluate
each individual defendant and, based on both the clinical assessment and
his own judgment of the situation, assign community service, drug
treatment, mental health services, trauma counseling, family mediation, and
so on. Still, sometimes he concludes that jail is the only option. “We give
them every reasonable chance, plus two. So when I do have to send them to
jail, it tends to be for twice as long as they might ordinarily get,” Calabrese
told The New York Times.
The Justice Center is starting to see some tangible results. According to
independent evaluators, it reduced the recidivism rate of adult defendants
by 10 percent and of juvenile defendants by 20 percent. Only 1 percent of
the cases processed by the Justice Center result in jail at arraignment. “I
have been in the justice system for twenty years,” Calabrese says in a
documentary film about the center, “and I finally feel that I have a chance to
really get to the problem that causes the person to come in front of me.”
The Justice Center team has been able to do this because they figured out
the larger purpose of why they wanted to gather: they wanted to solve the
community’s problems—together. And they built a proceeding around that.
Like all repeated gatherings, the Justice Center is a work in progress.
The participants, Berman said, are constantly “making sure that we are
remaining true to our mission. This is supposed to be a laboratory and a

model. It’s supposed to be a different way of doing things. And a better way
of doing things.”
Thinking of the place as a laboratory frees the people at the Justice
Center to be great gatherers. “There are no lines in our head about how we
should gather or what it needs to look like,” Berman told me. “Every case
and every client is looked at individually.” This attitude allows them to
separate their assumptions of what a court proceeding should look like from
what a proceeding could look like. We can use the same mindset to begin
reexamining our own purposes for gathering.
And it’s not just in public gatherings like courtrooms where we follow
traditional formats of gathering unquestioningly. A category can
masquerade as a purpose just as easily, if not more so, in our personal
gatherings, particularly those that have become ritualized over time. Thanks
to ancient traditions and modern Pinterest boards, it’s easy to overlook the
step of choosing a vivid purpose for your personal gathering. Just as many
of us assume we know what a trial is for, so we think we know what a
birthday party is for, or what a wedding is for, or even what a dinner party is
for. And so our personal gatherings tend not to serve the purposes that they
could. When you skip asking yourself what the purpose of your birthday
party is in this specific year, for where you are at this present moment in
your life, for example, you forsake an opportunity for your gathering to be a
source of growth, support, guidance, and inspiration tailored to the time in
which you and others find yourselves. You squander a chance for your
gathering to help, and not just amuse, you and others. Looking back, that’s
what I did when I barred my husband from my baby shower.
We were expecting our first child. My girlfriends offered to throw a
shower for me. Like most people, we didn’t spend any time thinking about
why we were having a baby shower. It wasn’t the first one we’d had in our
circle of friends, and it wouldn’t be the last. It was almost becoming a
routine—that great enemy of meaningful gathering.
And so, with a date agreed on, my girlfriends went straight into logistics.
I was excited. The problem was, my husband was, too. When I told him
about the shower, he asked if he could come.
I thought he was pulling my leg. Then I realized he was serious. He
really wanted to attend my baby shower.
At first I thought it made no sense. But in time I wondered if he had a
point.

I always value a circle of women in my life, but that wasn’t my highest
need in this case. If I had thought about my gathering need more deeply at
that moment, it probably would have been something about preparing both
my husband and me for our new roles and the new chapter of our marriage
as we welcomed our first child. I was becoming a mother. Anand was
becoming a father. But we were also, as our doctor pointed out,
transforming from a couple to a family. If I had been more thoughtful about
it, I would have sought out a gathering that helped us make that weighty
transition. But the structure and ritual of most baby showers—women-only,
playing games, opening presents, making something crafty for the baby—
were based on a different purpose. Traditional baby showers, I realized,
were rituals for expecting mothers and a collective way to help a couple
defray the costs of tending to a new life. The assumed format of this ritual
—women gathering around women—reflected an era when the only person
who really needed to prepare for parenting and a new transformative
identity was the mother. But what should a baby shower look like when the
purpose it was designed around no longer reflects the assumptions or
realities of the people it’s technically for? (Should it even be called a “baby
shower”?)
Baby showers aren’t the only form of ritualized gathering that suffers
from a purpose problem. Many of the ritualized gatherings in our more
intimate spheres—weddings, bar mitzvahs, graduation ceremonies—have
been repeated over time such that we become emotionally attached to the
form long after it accurately reflects the values or belief systems of the
people participating in it.
Today in India, for example, one such clash is arising over the structure
and content of marriage rites within the gathering of the traditional Hindu
wedding. In the traditional format, the rites end with a man and woman
taking seven steps around a fire, at each step saying a vow to each other.
These pheras, or rounds, are visually striking and, for many Hindu families,
steeped in meaning and tradition. It’s often the photograph plastered on
living room walls that children grow up staring at and imagining for their
own weddings one day. But some younger couples are beginning to feel that
the actual spoken words of the vows depict an outdated view of marriage:
The man directs his wife in the first vow to “offer him food”; the bride
agrees to be “responsible for the home and all household responsibilities”;
only the bride vows to “remain chaste,” with no such requirement made of

the man; four of the groom’s seven vows relate to children, but all of the
bride’s vows relate to the groom; and so on. The underlying assumptions of
the vows describe an ideal of marriage that many no longer want. But when
they suggest changing the ritual, to better reflect their actual values, the
parents are shocked, and often deeply hurt, seeing it as a rejection of their
traditions. The form itself has come to carry power, because of the
repetition through generations, even when it no longer serves the ostensible
purpose of the wedding for this couple.
Ritualized gatherings are hardly confined to the intimate realms of baby
showers and weddings. They affect our institutions equally. Of course,
ritualized gatherings are never ritualized at the beginning. The initial idea
emerges to solve a specific challenge. We need to find a way for the public
to understand the differences between the candidates’ positions. We need to
find a way to get our sales team excited about a new product. We need to
find a way to raise money for a new community center in the neighborhood.
A structure is designed to bring people together around that need. Then that
gathering—say, a presidential debate or a sales conference or a gala
fundraiser—gets repeated again and again, year after year, and often the
elements of the gathering become ritualized. That is to say, people begin to
attach meaning not just to the meeting’s purpose but also to the meeting’s
form. A specific gavel is always used. A certain turtleneck is always worn.
People come to expect these elements of form and even take comfort in
them. Over time, the form itself plays a role in shaping people’s sense of
belonging to the group and their identity within that group: This is who we
are. This is the way we do things around here.
This attachment can be powerful when the form matches the purpose
and need of the group. But as with the case of the courtroom, when the need
begins to shift and the format is solving for an outdated purpose, we can
hold on to the forms of our gatherings to the detriment of our needs. 
When Dean Baquet took over as the executive editor of The New York
Times in May 2014, he inherited an almost seventy-year-old gathering that
no longer fit the needs of the newsroom or of readers. The “Page One”
meeting at the Times was one of the most consequential meetings on earth.
First conceived in 1946, it had evolved into the gathering where editors
decided which articles would make the next day’s front page. These choices
helped to set the news agenda for the world.

In the meeting’s heyday, its purpose was clear, and its format and
structure logically derived from that purpose. The meeting was actually in
two parts: a 10 a.m. session and a 4 p.m. session, after which the leadership
would reveal “the lineup” of articles for the next day. For years, it took
place at the Times building in a third-floor conference room around a
massive wooden King Arthur–style table, with twenty-five or thirty editors
packed into the room. Editors pitched their lead articles, called “offers,”
making their cases for pieces they thought belonged on A1.
“The desks would come with their best stories and offer them to the
Olympic gods, and then would be grilled, and battle it out to see what
would make it,” one editor recalled to me.
As the meeting was repeated decade after decade, it gained the quality of
a ritual. It was a badge of honor to participate in it. It became a rite of
passage for young editors. When new reporters joined the Times, they
would often be invited to sit in the meeting as part of their orientation. “The
4 p.m. meeting became the stuff of lore,” Kyle Massey, a Times editor, has
written.
By the time Baquet arrived, however, it no longer necessarily made
sense to organize the most important meeting at the Times around the print
front page. The majority of readers accessed articles online rather than
through the physical edition. The home page and the print front page were
entirely different animals; the former might feature dozens of different
stories throughout the day. And according to an internal 2014 report on
innovation at the paper, the home page’s “impact is waning” as “only a third
of our readers ever visit it.” More and more readers were accessing online
articles through social networks, drastically reducing the curatorial power
of the editors. Besides, by the time the front page of the physical newspaper
reached subscribers’ doorsteps, the article would have spent hours or even
days online.
The Times needed to adapt to the new realities of the digital age, and
changing its anachronistic meeting was a way to reflect a commitment to
change—and to help spur it. “It was no longer good for our readers to focus
so much on print. But it was also bad for the journalists,” Sam Dolnick, an
assistant editor on the newspaper’s masthead, told me. “We changed the
meeting as a deliberate way to change the culture and values of the
newsroom. We wanted people to think less about print, so we needed the

meeting to be less about print. We used the meeting as a way to shift the
values and the mindset” of the newsroom.
Changing how the editors gathered—what they talked about, how much
time was devoted to what, who got airtime—offered a way to nudge the
culture of the newsroom toward new digital realities. Baquet wanted the
morning meeting to become a place for discussion about how Times
reporters and editors should be covering the news that day, across all
platforms. He hoped for practical discussion as well as time for larger
philosophical debates.
“To my mind, in the ideal world, the meeting should be where we
surface the stories we really have to focus on for the day, and sometimes
that’s obvious, like when you have a terror attack downtown, and
sometimes it’s less obvious,” Baquet told me. He also wanted to shift the
newsroom’s focus toward the content of the stories and away from their
placement. “It should be platform-free. It’s just, what are our best stories?”
he said.
And so Baquet changed the structure of the meeting to match a new
purpose. He changed the venue and physical environment of the meeting.
The storied King Arthur–style table was removed, and plans were made to
construct a new Page One meeting room with glass walls and red couches
—a more relaxed environment to facilitate a broader discussion about the
news. The day I attended a meeting, in the fall of 2017, it was still in
transition. The new room was still under construction, and the meeting was
held in a temporary conference room on the second floor with a large
square table in the center and a dozen green swivel chairs around it. The top
editors all sat in a row on one side, with editors from the various desks
seated on the other three sides. The Washington bureau chief had dialed in
on speakerphone. There was a second row of chairs lining the walls for
other staff and their guests. A flat-screen TV was fixed to the wall opposite
the leadership and set to the Times home page, which would refresh to show
the changing interface every few minutes.
Baquet also shifted the timing of the meetings. In an ever more rapid
news world, 10 a.m. had become too late for a morning meeting, so he
moved the meeting time to 9:30 a.m. He split the afternoon meeting into
two meetings: a 3:30 p.m. meeting with a much smaller group to decide
what goes on the front page of the print paper and then a 4 p.m. meeting to
look at the next day’s coverage.

As he transformed the hallowed meeting, he communicated his reasons
for doing so to the entire newsroom. He understood he was changing things
that people had grown accustomed to. In an email to his staff on May 5,
2015, he wrote, “The idea is for us to mobilize faster in the morning so we
can get an earlier start on setting news and enterprise priorities, and to move
the discussion of print Page One out of the afternoon meeting in order to
focus on coverage regardless of where it appears, as well as to plan our
digital report for the following morning.”
But changing the timing and setting would not have been enough to
uproot the values inculcated by the old gathering format. The meeting
would also have to be run differently. Whereas the meeting used to begin
with pitches, on the morning I was there it began with an audience report on
the number of views certain stories had attracted the night before and other
audience statistics. To start with a focus on what readers rather than editors
thought signaled a major change in New York Times culture. Editors of
various desks were asked to share what they were working on. As they did,
those on the masthead and a smattering of others would ask specific
questions about a piece and what the focus would be.
These questions began to reveal a new New York Times in the making. A
piece on a new tax proposal drew this question: “One of the things I think a
lot of readers want to know is: What does this mean for the rich?” At one
point, there was a debate about whether a certain article about a new health
study merited a mobile news alert, which signals breaking news and goes
out to all Times subscribers. Behind the specific query was one of those
larger philosophical questions: What merits the “breaking news” label? At
one point, the editor in charge of digital asked why a certain piece, if it was
ready, couldn’t be published now rather than waiting for 3 p.m., when it
was scheduled. In asking that question, he was pushing his editors to think
differently about when a piece goes live.
“We want to get people focusing on what the experience of The New
York Times is right now, or in the next two hours, on their phone,” Clifford
Levy, the deputy managing editor who oversees all digital platforms, told
me. “I think there’s still a bit of people planning things out, which is great,
but the here and now is just so super-important, and changing that
metabolism in the newsroom has been our long-term project.” While that
metabolism doesn’t change overnight, daily gatherings are a powerful tool
for adjusting it.

The meeting is still very much a work in progress, however. After all,
people still informally call it the Page One meeting.
Perhaps you, too, have new needs and realities that don’t fit into the
templates of gathering that you know. Perhaps you go with the flow of the
old templates, hoping things will work themselves out. There is nothing
terrible about going with that flow, about organizing a monthly staff
meeting whose purpose is to go through the same motions as every monthly
staff meeting before it. But when you do, you are borrowing from
gatherings and formats that others came up with to help solve their
problems. To come up with the formats they did, they must have reflected
on their needs and purposes. If you don’t do the same and think of yourself
as a laboratory, the way the Red Hook Community Justice Center and The
New York Times have done, your gathering has less chance of being the
most it can be.
COMMIT TO A GATHERING ABOUT SOMETHING
The television show Seinfeld was, famously, a “show about nothing.”
When people come together without any thought to their purpose, they
create gatherings about nothing. Yet many people sense this without being
told, and they lay the foundation of a meaningful gathering by making the
gathering about something. I want to challenge you to follow their example
—but to go further and deeper.
Most purposes for gatherings feel worthy and respectable but are also
basic and bland: “We’re hosting a welcome dinner so that our new
colleague feels comfortable in our tight-knit group,” or “I’m throwing a
birthday party to look back on the year.” These are purposes, but they fail at
the test for a meaningful reason for coming together: Does it stick its neck
out a little bit? Does it take a stand? Is it willing to unsettle some of the
guests (or maybe the host)? Does it refuse to be everything to everyone?
These may seem like unreasonable criteria for a meeting or poker night
or conference. You may well ask, Why does my gathering have to “take a
stand”? It’s not the Battle of the Alamo. I have heard this question before.
Virtually every time I push my clients to go deeper with their gathering’s
purpose, there is a moment when they seem to wonder if I am preparing

them for World War III. Yet forcing yourself to think about your gathering
as stand-taking helps you get clear on its unique purpose. Gatherings that
please everyone occur, but they rarely thrill. Gatherings that are willing to
be alienating—which is different from being alienating—have a better
chance to dazzle.
How do you do this? How do you arrive at a something worth gathering
about? What are the ingredients for a sharp, bold, meaningful gathering
purpose?
Specificity is a crucial ingredient. The more focused and particular a
gathering is, the more narrowly it frames itself and the more passion it
arouses. I have discovered this anecdotally through my own work, but one
of my clients has collected the data to back it up.
Meetup is an online platform for creating offline gatherings. People use
Meetup to coordinate thousands of in-person meetings around the world for
a range of purposes. Over the years, the company has helped millions of
people gather. When its founders began to study what made for a successful
group, a surprising observation came to light. It wasn’t always the big-tent
groups, being everything to everyone, that most attracted people. It was
often the groups that were narrower and more specific. “The more specific
the Meetup, the more likelihood for success,” Scott Heiferman, its
cofounder and CEO, told me.
To organize a group on the Meetup platform, one of the steps you have
to take is to give your group a name and write a description about what the
group is for. To increase the likelihood of success, Heiferman and his team
started to encourage organizers to put more specificity in the title of the
group, not just in the description. The tactic “makes it more visible and
clear, and it’s exciting to find something that is specific that fits you,” he
said. When an organizer in Istanbul or London or Toledo writes a group
name, the more adjectives she uses to describe the group, the more likely
the group will have what Meetup calls “tightness of fit.”
For example, “LGBT couples hiking with dogs” would have a tighter fit
(and presumably be more successful over time) than “LGBT couples
hiking” or “couples hiking with dogs” or even “LGBT hikers with dogs.”
Because, as Heiferman explains, “the who is often tied to the what.”
Specificity sharpens the gathering because people can see themselves in it.
However, “if you get really specific, then there won’t be enough people,
so there’s that balance between being not too tight of a fit and not too loose

of a fit to draw out a sense of togetherness and identity and welcomeness
and belonging.”
Uniqueness is another ingredient. How is this meeting or dinner or
conference unique among the other meetings, dinners, and conferences you
will host this year? I once visited a teahouse in Kyoto, Japan, where I
participated in a traditional Japanese tea ceremony to learn from their
wisdom on gatherings. The tea master there told me of a phrase the
sixteenth-century Japanese tea master Sen no Rikyū taught his students to
keep in the front of their minds as they conduct the ceremony: Ichi-go ichi-
e. The master told me it roughly translates to “one meeting, one moment in
your life that will never happen again.” She explained further: “We could
meet again, but you have to praise this moment because in one year, we’ll
have a new experience, and we will be different people and will be bringing
new experiences with us, because we are also changed.” Each gathering is
ichi-go ichi-e. And it can help to keep that in the forefront of our minds as
we gather.
I sometimes think of this as the Passover Principle, because of a
question that is ritually asked at the traditional Jewish seder on that holy
day: “Why is this night different from all other nights?” Before you gather,
ask yourself: Why is this gathering different from all my other gatherings?
Why is it different from other people’s gatherings of the same general type?
What is this that other gatherings aren’t?
A good gathering purpose should also be disputable. If you say the
purpose of your wedding is to celebrate love, you may bring a smile to
people’s faces, but you aren’t really committing to anything, because who
would dispute that purpose? Yes, a wedding should celebrate love. But an
indisputable purpose like that doesn’t help you with the hard work of
creating a meaningful gathering, because it won’t help you make decisions.
When the inevitable tensions arise—guest list, venue, one night versus two
—your purpose won’t be there to guide you. A disputable purpose, on the
other hand, begins to be a decision filter. If you commit to a purpose of your
wedding as a ceremonial repayment of your parents for all they have done
for you as you set off to build your own family, that is disputable, and it will
immediately help you make choices. That one remaining seat will go to
your parents’ long-lost friend, not your estranged college buddy. If, on the
other hand, you commit to the equally valid purpose of a wedding as a
melding of a new couple with the tribe of people with whom they feel the

most open, that, too, is disputable, and it implies clear and different
answers. The parents’ friend may have to stand down for the college buddy.
If I had applied these criteria to my own baby shower, here’s how it
might have gone. If I had sought out a more specific purpose than
celebrating the coming of a baby, I might have settled on the idea that my
husband and I were setting out to do something for which there was little
precedent: to parent equally. Because of the rarity of the practice until
recently, there isn’t much wisdom or folklore about how to make it work.
Instead, there are articles warning of how hard it is to “have it all” and
studies informing us about how treacherous equality can be for intimacy. A
more specific purpose suited to our needs might have helped us navigate
these relatively uncharted waters.
As for uniqueness, what might have made the shower different from
many others’ showers was the equal participation of the father and other
male guests in the ceremony.
And it is disputable that a baby shower should include a man, and, what
is more, be reorganized around his and potentially other men’s presence.
Disputable in a good way. We wished to be witnessed in our community as
a couple parenting in full and actual equality, not as a mom raising a child
with a dad who “helps.” This is a disputable way of life, and a shower
designed to help us get there would have had a disputable purpose.
Similarly, in the Red Hook community court, it is disputable that people
involved in the justice system all want the same thing. In a Hindu wedding
ceremony, it is disputable that you can change the words of the vows and
still have it be a “Hindu wedding ceremony.” Again, disputable in a good
way. There are certainly people who think that by changing the vows, you
are cutting from tradition, not honoring it. Similarly, at The New York
Times, there were certainly, at least for a time, journalists and editors who
did not think that digital should be elevated above print. Each of these
gatherings’ purposes were disputable—and that’s why, in part, they had
energy behind them.
SOME PRACTICAL TIPS ON CRAFTING YOUR
PURPOSE

When clients or friends are struggling to determine their gathering’s
purpose, I tell them to move from the what to the why. Here are some
strategies that help them do so.
Zoom out: If she doesn’t zoom out, a chemistry teacher might tell
herself that her purpose is to teach chemistry. While teaching is a noble
undertaking, this definition does not give her much guidance on how to
actually design her classroom experience. If, instead, she decides that her
purpose is to give the young a lifelong relationship to the organic world,
new possibilities emerge. The first step to a more scintillating classroom
begins with that zooming out.
Drill, baby, drill: Take the reasons you think you are gathering—
because it’s our departmental Monday-morning meeting; because it’s a
family tradition to barbecue at the lake—and keep drilling below them. Ask
why you’re doing it. Every time you get to another, deeper reason, ask why
again. Keep asking why until you hit a belief or value.
Let’s look at how we might move from the what to the why of
something as simple as a neighborhood potluck:
Why are you having a neighborhood potluck?
Because we like potlucks, and we have one every year.
Why do you have one every year?
Because we like to get our neighbors together at the beginning of the
summer.
Why do you like to get your neighbors together at the beginning of the
summer?
I guess, if you really think about it, it’s a way of marking the time and
reconnecting after the hectic school year.
Aha.
And why is that important?
Because when we have more time in the summer to be together, it’s
when we remember what community is, and it helps us forge the bonds that
make this a great place to live. Aha. And safer. Aha. And a place that
embodies the values we want our children to grow up with, like that
strangers aren’t scary. Aha. Now we’re getting somewhere.
Sometimes asking why means helping people drill until they find an
insight that will help them design the gathering itself. I was once advising a
publicist who was hosting a book event. I asked what the purpose of the
event was for her—what she wanted out of it. And she said something to

the effect of “To make it the best book of the fall.” If we had stopped there,
it wouldn’t have given her any guidance on how to design the book event.
Nor, frankly, was it an inspiring reason to people outside that publisher. So
we kept digging. Why do you think this book deserves to be the best book
of the fall? Why does this book matter so much to you? She thought about it
for a second and lit up, and said something like “Because it’s a powerful
rendering of how a story can completely change based on whose
perspective it is.” Aha. That was both meaningful and an insight she could
begin to design an event around.
Ask not what your country can do for your gathering, but what
your gathering can do for your country: I often press my clients and
friends to think about what larger needs in the world their gathering might
address. What problem might it help solve? Again, this may sound like too
much to ask for a chamber of commerce or a church group. But if you think
the problem of your country is that people from disparate tribes no longer
know one another or communicate honestly with one another, that kind of
insight and theory of the case can translate very plainly into a purpose of
using your gathering to collide different tribes.
Reverse engineer an outcome: Think of what you want to be different
because you gathered, and work backward from that outcome. That is the
formula of Mamie Kanfer Stewart and Tai Tsao, who set out some years ago
to improve the work meeting. Stewart grew up working in her family
enterprise—which is behind the hand sanitizer Purell. The meetings she
attended, Stewart told me, were “the absolute best part of the day.” It was
only when she set out into the world and discovered other companies’
meetings that she realized how awful most of them are. That inspired her to
study meeting behavior and how to fix it, and led her to start a business
called Meeteor to help companies meet better.
Stewart and Tsao’s big idea is that every meeting should be organized
around a “desired outcome.” When a meeting is not designed in that way,
they found, it ends up being defined by process. For example, a meeting to
discuss the quarter’s results is a meeting organized around process.
What, they might ask, do you want to achieve from discussing the
quarter’s results? To make a decision on new projects so that work on them
can move forward? To align as a team? To clarify plans and next steps? To
brainstorm a list of ideas? To produce something? Figuring out your desired
outcome brings focus to a meeting, and it does one more useful thing: It

allows people to make better choices about whether they need to be there. It
may even help a host decide whether a meeting is necessary for that
outcome or whether an email will do.
This focus on the outcome may sound obvious in a business context but
strange when getting together with friends and family. Yet working
backward from an outcome can be helpful in personal settings, too. Even
outside of work, you are proposing to consume people’s most precious
resource: time. Making the effort to consider how you want your guests,
and yourself, to be altered by the experience is what you owe people as a
good steward of that resource. You don’t have to make a big announcement
about this desired outcome. It’s just something that might help you become
clearer on why you are gathering. A Thanksgiving dinner animated by a
purpose of getting difficult issues out in the open to break an impasse
between family members is very different from a Thanksgiving dinner
oriented toward levity after a grueling and stressful year. Knowing what
you want to happen can help you make the choices to get there.
When there really is no purpose: If you go through these steps and
find that you still cannot figure out any real purpose for your get-together,
then you probably shouldn’t be planning the kind of meaningful gathering
that I am exploring here. Do a simple, casual hangout. Or give people their
time back. And plan your next gathering when you have a specific, unique,
disputable purpose that helps you make decisions about how the event
should unfold.
THIS CHART MAY HELP
Here is a chart showing how you might move from gatherings about
nothing to gatherings about something.
Gathering
type
Your purpose
is a category
(i.e., you don’t
have a
purpose)
Basic, boring
purpose, but at
least you’re
trying
Your purpose is specific, unique, and
disputable
(multiple alternatives)

Gathering
type
Your purpose
is a category
(i.e., you don’t
have a
purpose)
Basic, boring
purpose, but at
least you’re
trying
Your purpose is specific, unique, and
disputable
(multiple alternatives)
Company
offsite
To get out of the
office together in
a different
context
To focus on the
year ahead
To build and to practice a culture of
candor with one another
To revisit why we’re doing what
we’re doing and reach agreement
about it
To focus on the fractured
relationship between sales and
marketing, which is hurting
everything else
Back-to-
school
night
To help parents
and kids
prepare for the
year
To help integrate
new families into
the school
community
To inspire parents to sustain on
evenings and weekends the values
the school teaches during the days
To help connect the parents to one
another so as to make them a tribe
Church
small
group
To make the
megachurch a
smaller place
To help
everyone feel
like they belong
To have a group that keeps us doing
what we say we want to do
To have a trusted circle to share
struggles without worrying about
appearances
Birthday
party
To celebrate my
birthday
To mark the year
To surround myself with the people
who bring out the best in me
To set some goals for the year
ahead with people who will help me
stay accountable
To take a personal risk/do
something that scares me
To reconnect with my siblings
Family
reunion
To get the family
together
To have a time
together where
no one is
allowed to use
phones
To have a chance for the cousins to
bond as adults, without spouses and
children
To convene the next generation in
the wake of Grandpa’s death and
create a more tolerant family
reunion in line with the younger
relatives’ values
Book
festival
To celebrate
reading
To build
community
through books
To use books and a love of reading
to build community across racial
lines

THE MORASSES OF MULTITASKING AND
MODESTY
In my experience, a lot of people don’t gather with real purpose because
they’re not clear on what a purpose is or how you arrive at one. But many
others, myself included, aspire to greater purpose in gathering yet often run
up against two kinds of internal resistance. One comes from the desire to
multitask; the other from modesty. Both reared their heads when a woman I
know—we’ll call her S.—decided to have a dinner party.
She came to me because she was confused about the dinner. It clearly
wasn’t an ordinary dinner; she seemed to have some unspoken need to
make it special. But she wasn’t sure why she was having it, which left her
unsure of how to put it together.
When I asked why she was hosting, her initial response was “Because
this couple had us over, and we need to pay them back.”
This is, technically, a purpose, but it’s not much of one. So I asked more
questions. The more S. and I talked, the more unarticulated half-purposes
slipped out: to continue a rotation of hosting among a well-established
circle of friends; to bring more meaningful conversation into her life; to
help her husband create new business opportunities.
These were all worthy reasons to gather, but they were in tension with
one another. The goal of comfort didn’t jibe with the goal of dining with
people who might bring her husband business. The goal of entertaining her
regular circle of friends ran up against the goal of great conversation, which
can often be invigorated by new blood. S. was trying to jam several half-
hearted mini-purposes into one dinner party. No gathering could possibly
serve so many different purposes at once.
S. wasn’t unaware of the desirability of gathering with purpose. She had
come to me precisely because she knew that she wanted a more purposeful
gathering. Despite knowing this, she ran into the instinct to multitask—to
make a gathering do many things, not just something.
Through further questioning, I tried to get S. to commit to one of those
many possible somethings: If she could accomplish anything with this
dinner, how would she want her guests to walk away at the end? The more
we spoke, the more her ideas flowed, and the more excited she became.

She realized before long that what mattered most to her was creating a
gathering that interrupted the patterns of hosting that she had fallen into.
When they were younger, she and her husband had met new people through
his work. But as they aged, her husband started his own small company,
their kids left for college, and they had begun to gather less often. They
found themselves having similar conversations with the same people over
and over. While she loved her friends, having dinners only with them didn’t
contribute to the sense of adventure and variety they valued in themselves.
She decided what she wanted from the dinner—and from the dinners for
which it might set a precedent—was novelty and freshness. She decided to
put aside the demi-purposes of bringing her husband new business and
reciprocating with her friends, and to zero in on connecting meaningfully
with new people.
Making her gathering about one big something excited S., but it also
scared her. She was scared because the dinner she was originally heading
toward, however purposeless, was simple. It would likely have gone off
without a hitch—uneventful, low-key, no pressure. To gather in the way I
was guiding her toward was to commit to some big something.
“Who am I to gather in this way?” people often ask themselves. “Who
am I to impose my ideas on other people? A big purpose may be fine for a
state dinner or corporate retreat, but doesn’t it sound too arrogant,
ambitious, or serious for my family reunion/dinner party/morning
meeting?”
This modesty is related to a desire not to seem like you care too much—
a desire to project the appearance of being chill, cool, and relaxed about
your gathering. Gathering well isn’t a chill activity. If you want chill, visit
the Arctic. But modesty can also derive from the idea that people don’t
want to be imposed on. This hesitancy, which permeates many gatherings,
doesn’t consider that you may be doing your guests a favor by having a
focus.
So S. had grown clearer about her overriding purpose and hushed the
voices telling her to do many things at once with her gathering. And now
she overcame the pressures of modesty—the irksome questions that begin
with the words Who am I to . . . With her new focus on novelty and
freshness, she decided to invite three couples to dinner. One included a man
whom her husband had recently met through a work project and had liked
but hadn’t incorporated into their socializing routines. One was a younger

couple, former students of her husband’s. And then the couple who had
originally had them over for dinner.
My ears perked up at the mention of that third couple. I wondered
whether this was one of those old, discarded half-purposes popping back
out of the trash can. Why the last couple? I asked. Out of obligation?
S. replied that she actually did want them there, and that including one
close friend at the dinner might seed a new notion among her existing group
of friends that they don’t always have to socialize in the same old ways.
That was consistent with the new purpose she had settled on.
S. knew she wanted to have a single conversation among the group. And
in keeping with the idea of new blood, she wanted a question that would
reveal something about each person and connect the guests to one another.
She and her husband, both immigrants, decided to ask the table about their
conception of “home.”
Her husband began: “When my mother recently passed away, I realized
that visiting her was my last connection to my birth country. And that my
orientation to home had changed. In this political climate, as the very notion
of what it means to be American is being questioned, how do you think
about what ‘home’ is for you?”
The group, a mix of immigrants and native-born Americans, explored
the question together. The result was a beautiful, provocative conversation.
The question fulfilled S.’s desired purpose, because it allowed both for
hearing new people’s stories and for talking about larger current events. The
group laughed and questioned and even teared up, because the topic struck
a chord that was both universal and deeply personal.
Days later, S. received a grateful email from one guest. It read: “I am
still thinking about your amazing question. My husband and I continued to
talk about it all the way home. And now we’re even discussing it with our
children! Thank you.”
A gathering’s purpose doesn’t have to be formal, stiff, or self-important.
It doesn’t have to be philanthropic or achieve some social good. The
Golden Retriever Festival in Scotland, which attracts hundreds of dogs and
their owners, has an admirably clear, if cosmically inconsequential,
purpose: to pay tribute to Lord Tweedmouth, the nineteenth-century
nobleman responsible for developing that breed. The Coney Island
Mermaid Parade, in all its naked glory, has a clear purpose: to celebrate the

beginning of summer. Even sex parties have a purpose: to get laid in a
judgment- and repercussion-free zone.
Having a purpose simply means knowing why you’re gathering and
doing your participants the honor of being convened for a reason. And once
you have that purpose in mind, you will suddenly find it easier to make all
the decisions that a gathering requires.
PURPOSE IS YOUR BOUNCER
The purpose of your gathering is more than an inspiring concept. It is a
tool, a filter that helps you determine all the details, grand and trivial. To
gather is to make choice after choice: place, time, food, forks, agenda,
topics, speakers. Virtually every choice will be easier to make when you
know why you’re gathering, and especially when that why is particular,
interesting, and even provocative.
Make purpose your bouncer. Let it decide what goes into your gathering
and what stays out. When in doubt about any element, even the smallest
detail, hark back to that purpose and decide in accordance with it. In the
ensuing chapters, I will take you through some of the decisions you must
make when you seek to gather better and more meaningfully, equipped with
bold purpose. But I want to close this chapter with a story about a book
festival I once advised—a story that suggests what happens when you come
up with a purpose but are only semi-committed to it, and only semi-
committed to using it to guide your decisions. When you don’t use it as a
bouncer.
This book festival takes place every year in a major U.S. city. It had
once been a dream for its founders, and their purpose in those early days
was nothing more and nothing less than to make it exist. They succeeded. It
grew to attract thousands of visitors every year. Now they felt like they
needed a new purpose. The festival’s continuing existence felt assured.
What was it for? What could it do? How could it make itself count?
The festival’s leadership reached out to me for advice on these
questions. What kind of purpose could be their next great animating force?
Someone had the idea that the festival’s purpose could be about stitching
together the community. Books were, of course, the medium. But couldn’t

an ambitious festival set itself the challenge of making the city more
connected? Couldn’t it help turn strong readers into good citizens?
That seemed to me a promising direction—a specific, unique, disputable
lodestar for a book festival that could guide its construction.
Now it was time to give this would-be purpose a trial run as a bouncer. If
the purpose of this book festival was to weave the city more closely
together, how would it change? What would we add to, and what would we
subtract from, the gathering? We began to brainstorm.
I proposed an idea: Instead of starting each session with the books and
authors themselves, why not kick things off with a two-minute exercise in
which audience members can meaningfully, if briefly, connect with one
another? The host could ask three city- or book-related questions, and then
ask each member of the audience to turn to a stranger to discuss one of
them. What brought you to this city—whether birth or circumstance? What
is a book that really affected you as a child? What do you think would make
us a better city? Starting a session with these questions would help the
audience become aware of one another. It would also break the norm of not
speaking to a stranger, and perhaps encourage this kind of behavior to
continue as people left the session. And it would activate a group identity—
the city’s book lovers—that, in the absence of such questions, tends to stay
dormant.
As soon as this idea was mentioned, someone in the group sounded a
worry. “But I wouldn’t want to take away time from the authors,” the
person said. There it was—the real, if unspoken, purpose rousing from its
slumber and insisting on its continued primacy. Everyone liked the idea of
“book festival as community glue” in theory. But at the first sign of needing
to compromise on another thing in order to honor this new something, alarm
bells rang. The group wasn’t ready to make the purpose of the book festival
the stitching of community if it meant changing the structure of the
sessions, or taking time away from something else. Their purpose, whether
or not they admitted it, was the promotion of books and reading and the
honoring of authors. It bothered them to make an author wait two minutes
for citizens to bond.
The book festival was doing what many of us do: shaping a gathering
according to various unstated motivations, and making half-hearted gestures
toward loftier goals. When you gather in the way that I propose in this
book, first you set and genuinely commit to your purpose, and then the

decisions will flow. Among the early choices will be whom you invite and
where you convene them.

Two
Close Doors
•       •       •

PART ONE: WHO
The purpose-driven list
The guest list is the first test of a robust gathering purpose. It is the first
chance to put your ideals into practice. As with the book festival organizers
debating whether to change the way they opened author sessions, it is an
opportunity to assess how committed you really are to those ideals, how
willing to sacrifice invitations on the altar of your reason for gathering. I
have worked with more than a few hosts who feel gung-ho about their
gathering’s daring new purpose only to have their courage melt under the
pressure of deciding whom to include or exclude. The desire to keep doors
open—to not offend, to maintain a future opportunity—is a threat to
gathering with a purpose.
Inviting people is easy. Excluding people can be hard. “The more the
merrier,” we are told from childhood. “The more souls, the more joy,” the
Dutch say. “The more fools there are, the more we laugh,” the French
declare. At the risk of dissenting from millennia of advice along these lines,
let me say this: You will have begun to gather with purpose when you learn
to exclude with purpose. When you learn to close doors.
I take no pleasure in exclusion, and I often violate my own rule. But
thoughtful, considered exclusion is vital to any gathering, because over-
inclusion is a symptom of deeper problems—above all, a confusion about
why you are gathering and a lack of commitment to your purpose and your
guests.
Sometimes we over-include because we feel a need to repay an old debt
of hosting, as S. did. Sometimes we over-include because we’re sustaining a
custom in which we don’t really believe: “I couldn’t not invite the
marketing team. That would be a huge slap in the face. They always come.”
Sometimes we over-include because we don’t want to deal with the
consequences of excluding certain people, especially those gifted at making
a stink. We cave in to the founder who no longer works at the company but
wants to come to the leadership offsite, even though its purpose is to
establish the new CEO’s authority after the founder’s exit. We yield to the

aunt who happens to be visiting and presumes that her presence is additive
when a couple’s parents are meeting for the first time.
Faced with people who should not, in theory, be there but are hard to
keep away, it can feel easier and more generous to go with the flow. But the
thoughtful gatherer understands that inclusion can in fact be uncharitable,
and exclusion generous.
The kindness of exclusion
I was once part of a workout group that wrestled with this very question.
Is more merrier or scarier? At first, the group consisted of six friends who
gathered twice a week in a park at dawn with a trainer. We toned our abs
while trading stories and advice. The group was going strong—the highlight
of many of our days. And then one of us planned to go on vacation.
Because our practice was to prepay for a season, our friend would have lost
her money. She had a “better” idea. She wrote an email to the group,
introducing a friend of hers who would “substitute” for her while she was
gone. A number of us were surprised and uncomfortable at the substitution,
but we couldn’t articulate why.
Several of us seemed to intuit that the proposed substitution violated the
purpose of our gathering, but here was the problem: We had never actually
discussed its purpose. One day, one of the members helped us figure out
what was bothering us when she said, “This is not a class.” What it wasn’t
helped us to see what it was. The undiscussed but shared understanding of
our gathering was to spend time as friends while exercising. It was a
hangout that used the convening mechanism of exercise, not an exercise
class that happened to be attended by friends. We were a group of people
with busy lives who wanted to find a regular, reliable way of reconnecting
with specific other people we had chosen.
Once we talked about it and agreed that this was our workout group’s
purpose, it became easier to deal with the specific issue raised by our friend.
We decided we wouldn’t allow substitutions in the group, because a
stranger might damage the intimacy and people’s willingness to share. But
it also would take time out of the workout to teach a new person, who might
attend only once, the various exercises. After our unspoken purpose was
voiced and reaffirmed, it became obvious that the who of the gathering was

central to its purpose, and that, in this case, the more was scarier, not
merrier. Adding one person, while seemingly generous, would have been
uncharitable to the other five who had committed to the group based on
assumptions of warmth, social ease, and space for honesty.
Even when you get clear on your gathering in this way, there is never an
easy way to say “Please don’t come.” That’s why so many of our gatherings
end up being hijacked in the name of politeness. But here is what the skilled
gatherer must know: in trying not to offend, you fail to protect the gathering
itself and the people in it. I have learned that far too often in the name of
inclusion and generosity—two values I care about deeply—we fail to draw
boundaries about who belongs and why.
Of course, if inclusion is the purpose and identity of the gathering, a
porous boundary is fine, even perhaps necessary. But gatherings with many
other, wholly admirable purposes can suffer from over-inclusion.
Barack Obama’s aunt once told him, “If everyone is family, no one is
family.” It is blood that makes a tribe, a border that makes a nation. The
same is true of gatherings. So here is a corollary to his aunt’s saying: If
everyone is invited, no one is invited—in the sense of being truly held by
the group. By closing the door, you create the room.
In my workout group, I was on the excluding end of an argument about
inclusion. Some years earlier, however, in a different but similar situation, I
was on the pro-inclusion side. It took me time to see the compassionate
potential of the closed door.
The gathering was an annual weekend with friends that I’m going to call
Back to the Bay. We were a tight group of friends who were part of a
professional training program, and somehow the plan emerged for a trip to
the beach, where we could relax amid the pressure-cooker environment of
our program and be silly and light in ways we couldn’t during the weekly
grind. We played T-ball, barbecued, debated the proper sequence of alcohol
consumption, and organized “dance-offs” late into the night. For two years
in a row, it was the weekend everyone looked forward to, and its admittedly
basic purpose was broadly assumed, if unstated: to spend time together, to
have a release, to bond. We didn’t give the purpose much thought, frankly,
until it was tested.
When the third year rolled around, two members of our group had
become romantically involved with people not in our program. They both
wanted to bring their partners. After many emails and conversations about

these potential additions, they were asked not to bring them. One dropped
the issue and decided to go alone. It was still early in the relationship, and it
didn’t matter so much to her. The other student, however, was in a long-
distance relationship, and, making matters more complicated, he was a
soldier who would soon be deployed. Back to the Bay happened to land on
one of his few remaining weekends with his girlfriend. Moreover, he
wanted his girlfriend to witness him with his program friends, to see a
dimension of him that she didn’t know. He wanted her, in a sense, to know
what had been meaningful enough to keep him apart from her. So he again
asked the group about bringing her. First he was told that there wasn’t
enough space in the house we had rented. He offered that the two of them
could rent another place nearby and spend the days with the group. That,
too, ended up being denied, in an awkward and unforthcoming way. The
soldier, our friend, decided not to come. It felt strange to a number of us,
and it forced the group to grapple with the question of who belonged to it
and what it was for.
This grappling surfaced truths about the group and its purpose that many
of us who were part of it didn’t realize. As revealed in my workout group,
conflict often unearths purpose. What we all knew was that the group had
developed its rhythms and rituals and had created a certain magic. What
was not universally known was that an element of this magic was that it
was a rare space for one member of the group, a gay man whose sexuality
was known to his friends but hidden from the wider world, to be
unselfconsciously himself. Some of us had no idea that this was a big part
of what Back to the Bay offered—and not just to this classmate, but also to
those who felt for him and who enjoyed spending time with the freest
version of him. And what benefited him in the extreme benefited the rest of
us, too, if more subtly. Here was a place where we all could show sides of
ourselves without risk to our safety or career advancement—including
somewhat endangered sides. No one had ever formally declared this the
purpose of Back to the Bay, but for many it had come to be the unspoken
and inalienable one. And so the friends who had this point of view and who
dominated the group decided that outsiders would change the environment
for everyone. War or no war, the soldier’s girlfriend couldn’t come.
Years later, our gay friend came out publicly and became a leader in his
field. I like to think that this group of friends, nurturing this man and giving
him a zone of safety and freedom, helped him along his way. Although I

didn’t like the exclusion at the time, I now see that it was right to exclude
the two new partners. The more would have been the scarier. Keeping
others out was what let our friend be out with us.
Looking back on the episode, it becomes clear to me that when you
don’t root your gathering up front in a clear, agreed-on purpose, you are
often forced to do so belatedly by questions of membership that inevitably
arise. This was also what happened with my workout group: We didn’t
think about what it was for until we found ourselves in an argument about
who it was for.
To be clear, I don’t recommend backing into purpose through the
question of whom to invite. But the link between the two issues illustrates
that the purpose of a gathering can remain somewhat vague and abstract
until it is clarified by drawing the boundary between who is in and out.
When you exclude, the rubber of purpose hits the road. When you’re
hosting a gathering with others, as opposed to hosting on your own, you
should spend time not only reflecting on the purpose of the gathering but
then also, ideally, aligning on it with the other hosts. Why are we doing
this? Whom should we invite? Why?
To put it another way, thoughtful exclusion, in addition to being
generous, can be defining. It can help with the important task of
communicating to guests what a gathering is.
One of the most deft gatherers I know is a woman named Nora
Abousteit. She once told me a story about her late father, an Egyptian
immigrant to Germany named Osman Abousteit, that perfectly distills how
who isn’t invited can make the gathering.
Osman had arrived in the small town of Giessen, Germany, in 1957, to
study for a Ph.D. in chemistry. He observed, to his chagrin, that there was
no real place in Giessen for students to gather—no hangout where they
could be themselves free from their professors and the boring grown-ups of
the town. He decided to start Giessen’s first students-only bar. He named it
Scarabée in honor of the Egyptian dung beetle. Osman’s instincts were
right. His fellow students craved a hangout, and they flocked to Scarabée,
which lived by its own carefree rules. For example, at a time when it was
considered crass to drink beer out of a bottle rather than a glass, Scarabée
served beer in bottles. And yet it wasn’t this impertinence or the presence of
those droves of students that gave Scarabée its legendary status. It was,
rather, one very notable absence.

To get into the club, you had to show your student ID to a bouncer
outside. A nonstudent would show up from time to time and would be
denied entry. These exclusions helped underline the rule but also didn’t
make much of a splash. It was when the vice mayor of the town came by
one day that the situation grew interesting. The bouncer denied him entry.
The vice mayor protested. Osman came out to deal with the situation. He
enforced the rule and kept the vice mayor out. And it was this more
demanding and risky exclusion that cemented Scarabée’s reputation. It was
not a bar that happened to admit only students. It was a bar with a defining
purpose for which it was willing to fight. Sixty years later, the bar is still
hopping.
How to exclude well
So how, you might ask, do I exclude generously?
This issue comes up a lot when I’m organizing large, complicated
meetings for clients. These are some of the questions I ask them:
Who not only fits but also helps fulfill the gathering’s purpose?
Who threatens the purpose?
Who, despite being irrelevant to the purpose, do you feel obliged to
invite?
When my clients answer the first two questions, they begin to grasp their
gathering’s true purpose. Obviously people who fit and fulfill your
gathering’s purpose need to be there. And, though this one is harder, people
who manifestly threaten the purpose are easy to justify excluding. (That
doesn’t mean they always end up being excluded. Politeness and habit often
defeat the facilitator. But the hosts still know deep down who shouldn’t be
there.)
It is the third question where purpose begins to be tested. Someone
threatens a gathering’s purpose? You can see why to keep him out. But
what’s wrong with someone who’s irrelevant to the purpose? What’s wrong
with inviting Bob? Every gathering has its Bobs. Bob in marketing. Bob
your friend’s girlfriend’s brother. Bob your visiting aunt. Bob is perfectly
pleasant and doesn’t actively sabotage your gathering. Most Bobs are
grateful to be included. They sometimes bring extra effort or an extra bottle
of wine. You’ve probably been a Bob. I certainly have.

The crux of excluding thoughtfully and intentionally is mustering the
courage to keep away your Bobs. It is to shift your perception so that you
understand that people who aren’t fulfilling the purpose of your gathering
are detracting from it, even if they do nothing to detract from it. This is
because once they are actually in your presence, you (and other considerate
guests) will want to welcome and include them, which takes time and
attention away from what (and who) you’re actually there for. Particularly
in smaller gatherings, every single person affects the dynamics of a group.
Excluding well and purposefully is reframing who and what you are being
generous to—your guests and your purpose.
One common problem I run into is that in gatherings with multiple
hosts, different people have different Bobs. If you find yourself in a
situation where there is conflict over who the Bobs are, there is an
additional question to ask yourself that I have found useful: Who is this
gathering for first?
I once designed a multigenerational convening at a seaside resort for
forty leaders involved in a political movement. I was working with the
organizers, a team of four people from different organizations, to make the
guest list. They had agreed on the initial list, but as often happens, new
requests had come in, both from people who hadn’t been invited and from
guests who wanted to bring others. One influential donor had asked to bring
a friend along to the meeting. One organizer thought that we should let her,
worrying that she might not come otherwise. Another organizer argued that
the friend was, effectively, a Bob. I prompted the organizers to ask
themselves: Who was this gathering for first? The gathering was first for
the forty leaders. If the organizers could get them to agree on a common
vision, it would be a huge breakthrough for the movement. As the
organizers teased out the purpose, they realized that part of the magic of the
meeting would be to get these leaders to connect their various agendas to a
larger cross-unifying theme. To do that, we would need to design a
gathering where they meaningfully engaged with one another. In this case,
we believed, bringing a close friend would keep that guest’s attention at
least somewhat focused on her friend, as well as provide a safety blanket to
not engage as deeply as she might otherwise. She was told no. (She
accepted the invitation anyway.)
Another time, I was facilitating a gathering for a company in Brazil to
help its team think through the building of a new city. We had invited

twelve experts from around the world to come in for a day and dream up
radical new ways to design a modern, bold, sustainable city. At the last
minute, the firm’s executives asked if they could bring ten more people
from their side to observe the meeting, effectively doubling the size of their
group. Again, we had to ask, who was this gathering for first? The client.
And what was the underlying purpose? To come up with bold ideas that the
client would have the political capital and risk appetite to implement. In this
case, we realized these extra people weren’t actually Bobs. The gathering’s
purpose would actually be better served if more people observed the early
stage of the process, getting excited by these pie-in-the-sky ideas. And they
were people whose enthusiasm later in the process would be beneficial. We
agreed to let them come and, because the observers were going to
outnumber the participants, we tweaked the physical format of the meeting
accordingly. We decided to highlight the role of the observers and turn their
size into an advantage. We organized the room into two circles of chairs,
one within the other. In the inner circle, we placed twelve chairs for the
experts, whom I would facilitate through mini-talks and lively debate. On
the outside, in a larger circle with chairs facing toward the center, we placed
all the clients and their guests, who would sit on the periphery, without
phones, observing and listening deeply. The added size and energy of the
outside circle ended up creating an even more exciting environment for the
people inside the circle. People were really listening to their ideas—a lot of
people.
Good exclusion activates diversity
You might ask: In a world where exclusion becomes OK, aren’t we
moving backward? Isn’t exclusion in gatherings something we’ve been
fighting against for years? Isn’t exclusion, however thoughtful or
intentional, the enemy of diversity?
It is not.
I started my life as a facilitator by moderating racial dialogues. I am
biracial. I believe in few things as passionately as I believe in the power of
the unlike being brought together and made to figure out the world. I exist
because of that.

But diversity is a potentiality that needs to be activated. It can be used or
it can just be there. A citywide book festival whose audience is very diverse
but whose organizers keep them in silence, looking up at the conversations
onstage, isn’t getting much out of that diversity. Giving readers time and a
prompt to talk to one another would squeeze more juice and more insight
from difference. On the other hand, at Back to the Bay, the diversity was
well activated. A student who hid himself at school let himself become real
in that space. And it was exclusion that allowed that diversity to be
activated.
When I talk about generous exclusion, I am speaking of ways of
bounding a gathering that allow the diversity in it to be heightened and
sharpened, rather than diluted in a hodgepodge of people.
Consider the case of Judson Manor, a retirement community in Ohio that
has limited its membership to two distinct, tightly bounded populations:
college music students and retirees. This twist on a home for the elderly
occupies a revamped 1920s hotel. In 2010, what was then your standard-
issue retirement community decided to try an experiment after a board
member heard of a housing shortage at the nearby Cleveland Institute of
Music. It invited 2 and eventually 5 music students from the school to live
with its 120 elderly residents rent-free, in exchange for giving recitals and
art-therapy courses and spending time with residents. Organizers hoped the
music students would serve as a tonic against isolation, dementia, and even
high blood pressure. The idea was rooted in studies that show huge health
benefits for the elderly when they interact with young people. The students
would, in turn, receive what every artist dreams of—an eager, captive
audience—and what everyone else dreams of: free housing. (These
intergenerational housing experiments have also been tried in the
Netherlands to much fanfare.)
The result is a great example of thoughtful exclusion and flourishing
diversity, and of how they go hand in hand. No one could accuse Judson
Manor of homogeneity: its very raison d’être is to collide the old and the
young, two populations that are as divided from each other as any in many
rich countries. But to fulfill that purpose well, it had to tightly define the
who and the why. The head of Judson Manor, John Jones, was also keen to
ensure that the age distinction didn’t just coexist, but that it was activated.
“What is the match? And are they doing this for the right reason? Do
they really have a genuine interest in integrating within our community? We

just don’t want this to just be a free apartment for the rest of their school
time,” Jones says in a documentary about the program. One imagines the
experiment wouldn’t have worked as well if it allowed in anyone of any age
who wished to volunteer their time with old people. Or students of any
background and any major. Or even music students who had their own
apartments and planned to drop in when it suited them. In any of those
cases, the experiment would have been diluted. More openness would have
meant weaker activation of the age differential the home was seeking to
bring together. There was a power in the specific age and moment of life
these students were in that inspired the residents. When asked what was
special about having these young people around, one elderly resident said,
“That’s where life is.” And at the same time, the students benefit from
having “a lot of extra grandparents,” as one young resident put it. “It’s crazy
to think as I talk with the centenarians here, and sixty- and seventy-year-
olds, that they’ve lived four of my lifetimes, some of them, and have all this
experience that I can ask them about,” another music student, Daniel
Parvin, said. And it was the music that gave the relationship an initial focus.
Here is the lesson of Judson Manor as I see it: Specificity in gathering
doesn’t have to mean narrowing a group to the point of sameness. With
certain types of gatherings, over-including can keep connections shallow
because there are so many different lines through which people could
possibly connect that it can become hard to meaningfully activate any of
them. Excluding thoughtfully allows you to focus on a specific,
underexplored relationship. An overly inclusive volunteer program at
Judson Manor would have been similar to many volunteer programs at
nursing homes. The tightly bound program transformed it from a service
program into a relationship between young artists and aging ears.
I first came upon this idea of specificity in gathering across difference in
college when I facilitated racial dialogue groups. The program I helped
bring to my campus was called Sustained Dialogue. It was a small-group
process developed by a veteran American diplomat that enabled people to
have difficult conversations across lines of conflict. I was a student at the
University of Virginia, where the first question many people asked me,
seeing a racially ambiguous face, was “What are you?” Other people had it
far worse than I did, and when outright racial conflict flared up for the
umpteenth time in UVA’s fraught history, some classmates and I decided to

explore whether the Sustained Dialogue process could encourage people to
talk.
Over the next few years, we hosted more than two dozen year-long
small-group dialogues. Each of them consisted of a group of twelve to
fourteen students who committed to meeting every two weeks for three
hours to delve into these topics and build relationships with students who
were unlike them. I was a student moderator, and I led the weekly debrief
sessions among the other moderators, which were designed to identify and
cross-pollinate what we were learning.
As we began to experiment with the makeup of each group, we started
getting reports from student moderators that the best, liveliest, most intense
groups were those consisting of two groups locked in a particular historical
conflict, as opposed to the more general “multicultural” groups. Year after
year, it was the dialogues that focused on one specific relationship—the
black-white dialogue, the Jewish-Arab dialogue, and, on another campus,
the Republican-LGBT dialogue—that had the highest ongoing membership
and the most heat (of the kind you want in a dialogue). These were also the
groups in which the moderators felt that they were achieving profound
breakthroughs rather than just having interesting conversations. But to keep
the focus, we had to be willing to say no to students who weren’t of those
backgrounds and wanted to participate, and to thoughtfully defend our
decision.
The matter of size
Sometimes after I have guided a client to do what we’ve talked about
here, she is ready to exclude in a purposeful way. But the inevitable
question arises: How do I tell people?
The most honest way is to point your would-be guest to your purpose.
Your purpose isn’t personal. Your gathering has a life of its own, and you
might tell them that this is not the gathering best suited to them.
But it can also be helpful to blame size, and if you do, you aren’t lying.
For every gathering purpose, there is a corresponding ideal size. There is no
magic formula for the chemistry of what happens in a room; it’s not
scientific. And yet the size of a gathering shapes what you will get out of
people when you bring them together.

If you want a lively but inclusive conversation as a core part of your
gathering, eight to twelve people is the number you should consider.
Smaller than eight, the group can lack diversity in perspective; larger than
twelve, it begins to be difficult to give everyone a chance to speak.
Therefore, when you are figuring out whom to include and how to exclude,
know that by jamming in those extra few people you are changing the
nature of the interaction because of the size of the group. If, on the other
hand, the purpose of your meeting is to make a decision, you may want to
consider having fewer cooks in the kitchen. Additionally, decision-making
bodies like the Supreme Court purposely have an odd number of deciders in
the group to improve the probability of a decision.
In my experience, there are certain magic numbers in groups. Every
facilitator has his or her own list, and these are obviously approximations,
but here are mine: 6, 12 to 15, 30, and 150.
Groups of 6: Groups of this rough size are wonderfully conducive to
intimacy, high levels of sharing, and discussion through storytelling. The
Young Presidents’ Organization, a network for CEO types, has developed a
highly structured process that helps peers in groups of 6 thoughtfully coach
one another through their problems. Groups of 6 are, on the other hand, not
ideal for diversity of viewpoints, and they cannot bear much dead weight.
To make the gathering great, there’s more responsibility on each person.
Churches often encourage their members to join “small groups” of 6 or so
members, who meet weekly to have dinner and share prayer requests, pains,
and joys. It helps make the church a smaller place.
Groups of 12 to 15: The next interesting number is around 12. Twelve
is small enough to build trust and intimacy, and small enough for a single
moderator, if there is one, formal or informal, to handle. (When multiple
facilitators are required at a large meeting, it is customary to divide the
number of participants by 12 to figure out how many facilitators are
needed.) At the same time, 12 is large enough to offer a diversity of opinion
and large enough that it allows for a certain quotient of mystery and
intrigue, of constructive unfamiliarity. In Sustained Dialogue, our groups
were always between 8 and 12 people. King Arthur’s famous table had 12
seats. Jesus had 12 apostles. The U.S. presidential cabinet, which expands
as new departments are born, now consists of 15 secretaries plus the vice
president. In my work, I have found that 12, give or take, is the number
beyond which many start-ups begin to have people problems as they grow. I

sometimes refer to this as the “table moment,” when an organization’s
members can no longer fit around one table. It is a milestone that causes
more problems than you would imagine. I once worked with a technology
company that hit this size and began observing conflict and mistrust in a
culture that had previously been collegial. When the size of the group was
still under a dozen, the entire company could grab a chair and sit in one
conference room to discuss anything. Once the staff grew to 20, meetings
started to exclude people. Exclusion was probably good for focus, but it
changed the vibe of the company.
Groups of 30: Thirty starts to feel like a party, whether or not your
gathering is one. If smaller gatherings scale greater heights of intimacy, the
group of 30 or so has its own distinctive quality: that buzz, that crackle of
energy, that sense of possibility that attaches to parties. Groups of this size
are generally too big for a single conversation, although I’ve seen that done
well with experienced facilitators and the proper arrangement of a room.
Groups of 150: The next interesting number lies somewhere between
100 and 200. When I speak to conference organizers who think about group
dynamics, the ideal range I hear again and again is somewhere between 100
and 150 people. While they disagree on the precise number, they all agree
that it’s the tier at which, as one organizer told me, “intimacy and trust is
still palpable at the level of the whole group, and before it becomes an
audience.” Spark Conference, an experimental gathering run by leaders in
the media, began with 100 people, and found that 70 created a more
intimate environment. Many so-called “unconferences,” at which attendees
improvise the agenda, are designed for 100 people. A Belgian hotelier I
know recommended weddings of 150 because, she felt, that was the size at
which everyone could see one another at the same time and thereby
function as a kind of organism. This spectrum roughly matches what some
anthropologists have come to regard as the natural size of a tribe. The group
of 150 is one in which everybody can still meet everybody, if the intention
is there and the effort is made. This number, 150, also matches the number
of stable friendships that the anthropologist Robin Dunbar says humans can
maintain, which has come to be called Dunbar’s number. Above the “tribe”
number, it’s still possible to gather well, of course, but the unit of
experience usually gets broken up into smaller subgroups.
Tides of humanity: Well beyond these gathering sizes is the sea of
humanity. Think Bonnaroo, the World Cup, Tahrir Square, the Million Man

March, the hajj in Mecca, the Olympics. These are gatherings where the
goal is not so much intimacy or connection as tapping into the convulsive
energy of a massive crowd.

PART TWO: WHERE
A venue is a nudge
You have your purpose in mind. You have your guest list in hand. Where
will you gather?
The choice of place is often made according to every consideration but
purpose. The cost determines the venue. Or convenience. Or traffic. Or the
fact that someone happened to raise her hand and offer her deck.
When you choose a venue for logistical reasons, you are letting those
logistics override your purpose, when in fact they should be working for it.
You might object: Isn’t a room sometimes just a room? What’s wrong
with taking Morgan up on her offer of her deck?
Here is the problem: Venues come with scripts. We tend to follow rigid
if unwritten scripts that we associate with specific locations. We tend to
behave formally in courtrooms, boardrooms, and palaces. We bring out
different sides of ourselves at the beach, the park, the nightclub. As Patrick
Frick, a fellow member of my tribe of professional facilitators, told me,
“The environment should serve the purpose.” When he is working with
high-level teams and they give him a boardroom to facilitate the meeting in,
he said, “ninety-five percent of my options are gone.” Why? Because, Frick
said, “people who walk into this room will immediately fall into the same
pattern of behavior: The CEO sits at the top, and you’re trained—you’re
absolutely trained and brainwashed—how to behave there. You take your
place according to hierarchy, you know when you’re allowed to speak, and
so on.”
Jerry Seinfeld once made a similar point to an interviewer about how
rooms determine comedic success: “The room is doing eighty percent of the
job. And every comedian has had this experience where he’s been in a club,
some rich guy sees him and says, Oh, I’m going to have this guy at my
party. And you go to the party, and they put you on in a living room or in
some weird party room. And you go in the toilet. And the reason is the
context of the room does eighty percent of the work, in terms of giving you
a position of advantage over the audience.”

To paraphrase and distort Winston Churchill, first you determine your
venue, and then your venue determines which you gets to show up. If
figuring out the guest list is about deciding who best helps you fulfill the
purpose of your gathering, figuring out the venue is about deciding how you
want to nudge those chosen few to be the fullest versions of themselves and
the best guests.
So how do you choose a good, purposeful location for your gathering?
Embodiment
You should, for starters, seek a setting that embodies the reason for your
convening. When a place embodies an idea, it brings a person’s body and
whole being into the experience, not only their minds.
Larry O’Toole, the CEO of Gentle Giant Moving Company, based in
Boston, makes use of embodiment when inducting new recruits. He leads
groups of recent hires on a group run around Boston that ends with a race
up the steps of Harvard Stadium. The choice of locale—compared with,
say, an orientation conducted in an office—tells the new hires something
about the place they have joined: To work here, you have to be physically
fit, and just as important, when you are doing hard work, you should do it
collegially, cooperatively, cheerfully, and with a sense of sport. Not
surprisingly, year after year Gentle Giant gets rated as one of Boston’s best
places to work.
Embodying a purpose doesn’t necessarily require going anywhere
special. Sometimes just reconfiguring a room is enough. Wendy Woon runs
the department of education at the Museum of Modern Art in New York.
Her job is to help make a world-famous museum more accessible to the
public. It is a challenging job in any museum, because the power in
museums tends to lie with the curators. Sometimes it can seem that
museums are being run for them and not merely by them. The goal of
making a museum speak to ordinary people is often in tension with the
curators’ desire for exhibits that win them esteem among their fellow
curators and the larger art world. The job of someone like Woon is to
constantly provide a counterweight to that desire—to be the voice within
the museum for questioning how art is presented and for ensuring that it’s
still accessible and connects to people’s lives and experiences. Even if that

means pushing back against the curators. Woon’s role is to remind people
that what curators may consider sacred isn’t sacred—that a museum should
adapt itself to speak to people.
As part of her job, Woon teaches a course for graduate students who
aspire to become museum educators. It takes place in a classroom within
the museum. On the first day of class, at 3 p.m. sharp, the classroom door
opens. In the middle of the room is a huge mess of white chairs, all tangled
together—a giant highway pileup of seating. The students pause, confused.
They look around at one another and then at Woon. Their teacher watches
quietly, giving away nothing.
Eventually the students begin talking to one another. Little by little, their
confidence growing, their interactions becoming more amusing by the
minute, they untangle the chairs and arrange them. As they do so, each
student must decide what to do with his or her chair without instructions:
Where should I put my chair? How close should the chair be to someone
else’s? Are we forming rows? A circle? If someone is not going along with
the group shape, what should we do?
This is what I mean when I say that gathering well doesn’t require
money or fish knives. It doesn’t require a fancy venue. The classroom that
Woon uses is utterly ordinary—an unremarkable space in a building, and a
city, full of remarkable spaces. By doing one simple thing—setting up the
chairs in that crazy tangle—Woon makes the place an embodiment of her
purpose. What was that purpose? To teach these future museum educators
that nothing in a museum is sacred—not even a pile of chairs that at MoMA
could have been confused for a work of art. And to teach them that art truly
happens when people participate in it, and that a museum comes to life
when people interact with it. “The reason I do this is to challenge traditional
hierarchies of teaching and learning. The design of social space, physical
space, and emotional space affects how people engage with ideas, content,
and each other. And I wanted to show my students that you must actually
design a ‘space’ for exchange and also then invite participation by design,”
she explains. Over the course of the ensuing weeks, she teaches these
aspiring museum educators how to make such interactions happen—how to
achieve the kind of participatory museum she believes in and fights to
defend. But on that first day, at zero cost and to unforgettable effect, she
embodies all that she wished to say.

I am no Wendy Woon, but in my own work I try to have my clients
choose spaces and locations that resonate with their deeper goals. For a
workshop on people trying to find their path forward in life, a twelfth-
century monastery in southeastern France set on one of the routes to the
Camino de Santiago, a literal path of pilgrimage. For an architecture firm
discussing the future of cities, the Hollywood Hills, overlooking all of Los
Angeles. For a comedian looking to take his craft to the next level, the
famed writing room of the satirical newspaper The Onion. I have seen, over
and over again, that when a location inspires a client and makes them feel
closer to their purpose, it makes my job as a facilitator much easier, as they
are already halfway there.
Consider your own gatherings. What if for your company’s next sales
training you assigned employees to each spend the day underground with a
subway busker, to build their empathy and connect them with the most
extreme version of what they do? What if you held your next college
reunion in a cemetery, reminding your classmates, directly if morbidly, that
time is of the essence for fulfilling the ideals they professed in their youth?
Sadly, the failure to embody is more common. The unwillingness to do
so can be almost comical. I once advised an organization that advocates for
protecting oceans. It was hosting a team meeting near San Diego to give
everyone a break from their stuffy East Coast offices. When I looked at the
schedule, it was chockfull. I asked when they’d have time to go to the
ocean. “Oh, we have too much to do to go see the ocean,” the organizer told
me. This was an organization that people were devoting their lives to
because of their passionate love of the ocean. Spending time in and by the
ocean could rejuvenate a strung-out team and remind them of their core
purpose. This meeting didn’t.
The Château Principle
The Château Principle, in its narrowest form, is this: Don’t host your
meeting in a château if you don’t want to remind the French of their
greatness and of the fact that they don’t need you after all.
Every gathering with a vivid, particular purpose needs more of certain
behaviors and less of others. If the purpose has something to do with
bonding a group, you will want more listening behavior and less declaiming

behavior. If the purpose is to get your company out of the rut of old ideas
and thinking, the opposite may be true. What many hosts don’t realize is
that the choice of venue is one of your most powerful levers over your
guests’ behavior. A deft gatherer picks a place that elicits the behaviors she
wants and plays down the behaviors she doesn’t. The failure to follow this
principle once cost a banker a lot of money, not including the château bill.
“I will argue until the day I die that the meeting place we chose killed
the deal,” Chris Varelas, an investor now settled in the Bay Area, told me.
Back in 2001, Varelas was an investment banker—a managing director at
Citigroup and the head of its technology banking group. He came onto a
project representing Lucent, a New Jersey–based telecommunications
company, in a massive proposed merger with Alcatel, the French giant. The
deal was valued at more than $20 billion. It was a complicated merger, and
after roughly a year of talks, the merger finally seemed to be lining up. One
gathering remained: a face-to-face meeting for executives to do the final
mutual due diligence.
Until that gathering, the two sides had done a good job of maintaining a
useful fiction. This deal was “supposed to be a marriage of equals,” Varelas
said, but everyone quietly knew that Alcatel, being the more powerful of
the two, “was going to be more equal.” Yet until that point, according to
Varelas, the perception that the two were equals had mostly held throughout
the talks. It was a big part of why they had gone as well as they had—until
a choice of venue upended the pattern.
The originally scheduled venue was a nondescript airport hotel in New
Jersey, so that “no one would know what we’re doing,” Varelas said.
Keeping details out of the media was an important priority, to avoid
embarrassment on either side should the deal not happen and also to “avoid
a leak, which can scuttle a deal if the market reaction is negative.” At the
last minute, however, a senior director of Alcatel fell ill and requested that
the meeting be relocated to France. They chose as the forum for the talks
the Château des Mesnuls, a castle about an hour’s drive west of Paris,
which was owned by an Alcatel subsidiary. “I’m pretty sure they used it
regularly for offsites, which probably worked fine for internal rah-rah
planning and strategy sessions but not for a merger negotiation,” Varelas
said.
It is a fifty-five-room château restored in the Louis XIII style, complete
with Persian rugs, gold frescoes, chandeliers, and portraits of famous

French soldiers—including, one presumes, those who have recently
outwitted Anglo-Saxons who mistakenly thought themselves the equals of
the French. Over the course of three eighteen-hour days, a few dozen
participants—including the corporate executive teams, board directors,
bankers, accountants, and lawyers from both sides—met in the château to
nail down the final agreement. And then, in the final hours, after The Wall
Street Journal had published news of the impending merger, including the
agreed-upon price, Henry Schacht, the chairman of Lucent, walked out of
the meeting, and the merger fell apart.
According to news reports at the time, the walk-out was tactical—the
two sides were struggling to agree on board representation. But it was also
emotional. “In Alcatel’s failed effort to buy Lucent Technologies, the
sticking point was pride,” The New York Times reported. “Lucent officials
are reported to have balked,” the BBC said at the time, “because they did
not believe that Alcatel was treating the deal as a merger of equals.”
And why were they suddenly not treating the deal in the way they had
dutifully treated it for a whole year? It is impossible to say. But Varelas
maintains that it’s because “the château brought the Frenchness out in the
French.
“We’re sitting in these ballrooms having these discussions,” he said,
“and you could just see the arrogance and hubris of Alcatel employees.
They became much more comfortable asserting their dominance than I
know they would have if we had been in Jersey.” The French started saying
things like “When we take over” and, Varelas said, “It really pissed them
off”—“them” being the Lucent executives. The Lucent side was aghast at
Alcatel’s behavior, Varelas said. Lucent’s chairman finally said, “We’re out
of here.” Deal off.
Seventeen years later, with many more mergers under his belt, Varelas
sticks to his theory. “I’m ninety-nine percent sure that the meeting place
reinforced or brought out the underlying assumption. It exposed the fiction
that it was a ‘merger of equals,’ because it allowed the Alcatel people to be
too comfortable in asserting their dominance over Lucent,” he said.
Even if you’re not negotiating a multibillion-dollar deal, the Château
Principle may apply to your gathering. People are affected by their
environment, and you should host your gathering in a place and context that
serves your purpose. In some cases, hosting your gathering in a château
may absolutely be conducive to your purpose. But for the two companies,

which needed the French to remain modest for only one more day, it turned
out to be, at great cost, the wrong environment.
Five years later, the merger between Lucent and Alcatel finally
happened, albeit under the auspices of a new chairman and CEO at Lucent.
One presumes they stayed away from châteaus.
Displacement
So a well-chosen venue might signal to people what your gathering is
ultimately about (embodiment). It might nudge people to behave in the
particular ways that make the most out of this coming-together (the Château
Principle). And a venue can and should do one further thing: displace
people.
Displacement is simply about breaking people out of their habits. It is
about waking people up from the slumber of their own routines. As a
facilitator, I seek to do that through the questions I ask and the exercises I
run. But it is also possible to achieve a great deal of displacement through
the choice of a space. As in the case of Wendy Woon, it takes imagination
and effort more than anything else to achieve a little displacement. It is not
more complicated than doing an activity in a place where people would
think you shouldn’t.
A dinner, for example, is generally thought best had on dry land. That, at
least, is the conventional wisdom. However, one night in the Greek town of
Kalamata, in the 1940s, the British travel writer Patrick Leigh Fermor and
his friends had another idea. As the group was seated on the quay waiting
for their meal to arrive in the searing heat, Fermor and his two companions
silently picked up their iron table and carried it into the sea. They sat waist-
deep in the water, patiently awaiting service. When the waiter emerged
from the restaurant, Fermor wrote, he “gazed with surprise at the empty
space on the quay; then, observing us with a quickly masked flicker of
pleasure, he stepped unhesitatingly into the sea” with their dinners. The
surrounding diners, amused at the spectacle, began to send the maritime
diners wine in celebration of their insouciance. Perhaps not surprisingly,
Fermor’s New York Times obituary would note that his “tables” were
“reputed to be among the liveliest in Europe.”

A dinner party is not supposed to take place in an ocean. Which is why
Fermor went there. And which is why you should think about where your
next gathering ought not take place, and hold it there.
But, as in the case of Woon’s classroom, displacement can also occur
within a traditional location. Take, for example, the famed photographer
Platon.
You’d probably recognize a Platon if you saw one. He shot cover
photographs for Time magazine for many years and was a staff
photographer for The New Yorker magazine. His signature style is a
photograph taken so close to his subjects that you can see their pores.
Platon has photographed every sitting U.S. president from Jimmy Carter
through Barack Obama. He has done multiple portraits of Hillary Clinton
and Donald Trump, well before they were presidential candidates. He has
photographed world leaders from Angela Merkel to Tony Blair to Ban Ki-
moon, the eighth secretary-general of the United Nations, and infamous
despots from Russia’s Vladimir Putin to Zimbabwe’s Robert Mugabe, from
Libya’s Muammar Gaddafi to Iran’s Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. Platon has
photographed not only the powerful but also people who have challenged
power, from the Burmese activist Aung San Suu Kyi (while still under
house arrest), to Pussy Riot, to protesters in Tahrir Square, to Edward
Snowden. And he’s shot hundreds of celebrities, from George Clooney to
Yoko Ono to Bono.
What’s remarkable about Platon, though, beyond his litany of famous
subjects, is what he is able to get these people to do in the room with him. It
is in the interest of these leaders, many of whom have press secretaries and
image consultants, to show a face that they want the public to see. It is in
Platon’s interest to get them to show something else, something real.
When Platon is able, he will have his famous subjects do the shoot in his
studio in New York’s SoHo neighborhood. However, for many subjects,
he’s not always able to choose the location. He’s often given just ten
minutes with a head of state to get the right shot, sometimes in a cramped
hotel room, sometimes backstage at a university or concert or at the United
Nations. In these cases, he can’t control the space to the extent he’d like.
But regardless of the context, he brings a decrepit, falling-apart, white-
painted crate for his famous subjects to sit on. “I start by inviting them to
‘step into my office,’ which is funny, because usually I’m stepping into
their office,” he told me. This old white crate is a box that he’s had every

one of his subjects sit on. Apparently, sometimes a presidential advance
team will see the box and freak out: “We can’t ask him to sit on that box.”
Then Platon tells them who else has sat on that box, and they always
acquiesce.
Platon is displacing his subjects from the context that they’re in and is,
through this physical object, connecting them to all the other photo shoots
(and therefore people) who have come before them. He may have seven
minutes with a president, but those seven minutes are going to be defined
by his space and context, not theirs. After years of lugging it around, when
the box finally fell apart, he had his assistants remake the new one to look
as old and weathered as the original. It had become the gritty symbol that
temporarily displaced a leader from his throne.
Perimeter, area, and density
The above pointers should help you choose your overall environment.
Once you do, you will be faced with more practical questions about rooms
and tables and chairs and the sizes of things. A few notes, therefore, on
perimeter, area, and density.
PERIMETER
Metaphorical doors aren’t the only doors that need closing in a
purposeful gathering. The artful gatherer is also mindful of physical doors.
Gatherings need perimeters. A space for a gathering works best when it is
contained. Photographers and choreographers often close all the doors in a
room to, as Platon explained to me, “make sure the energy isn’t leaking
out.”
This rule is commonly violated in restaurants. Tables are often set up so
that there is no “head” of the table, with chairs facing each other in two
rows. I once went to a dinner at a restaurant with five friends. Our table was
three square tables pushed together, with three chairs on each side.
Throughout the evening, the conversation never really took off. It was
difficult to have one conversation, as the person in the middle had to look
left and right, as if watching a tennis match, and eventually the table broke
off into two separate conversations. The two ends of the table remained
“leaky.” It didn’t feel cozy or intimate. We should have simply asked the

waiter to remove one of the square tables and moved two people to the
ends. We would then have had a contained space (through the placement of
our bodies) and it would have been easier for us to talk, to share—to come
together.
A contained space for a gathering allows people to relax, and it helps
create the alternative world that a gathering can, at its best, achieve. It can
be as simple as putting down a blanket for a picnic rather than sitting on the
endless expanse of grass; or temporarily covering the glass walls of a
fishbowl conference room with flip-chart paper to create a modicum of
privacy. Or if there’s an extra chair at a meeting that is not going to be used,
removing it and closing the gap between people. One underground party
planner explained it to me like this: “If you are on a picnic blanket, you will
hang out around your picnic blanket. It’s not because there’s a fence around
it; it’s because your picnic blanket is your mental construct. It’s not about
sitting on a blanket versus sitting on the grass; it’s about claiming that
mental space and making it yours and comfortable and safe.”
A game designer named Eric Zimmerman once told me about an
experiment he and his colleagues designed for an exhibition in Los
Angeles. The board game they created was surrounded by four curved walls
that approximated a circle, so that when you stepped inside to play, it felt as
if you were in a cave. Passersby were intrigued and players ended up
becoming so addicted to the game that well after day had given way to
night, they kept playing. At last, after the organizers took down all the other
sets, they had to remove the four walls, though they left the board game
intact. As the walls came down, one by one the players lost interest in the
game and dispersed, despite the game remaining playable.
“When the walls came down, even though we didn’t take away any of
the pieces of the board game, they didn’t feel like continuing,” Zimmerman
told me. “The energy was dispersed.” Once the game’s perimeter was gone,
its players lost their sense of being in an alternative universe.
MOVING ROOMS
You don’t have to bring your meeting to the ocean (though I highly
recommend it) to make it memorable. Studies show that simply switching
rooms for different parts of an evening’s experience will help people
remember different moments better. To ensure people will remember the
distinct parts of your party, Ed Cooke, an expert on the workings of

memory, suggests having several interesting phases over the course of the
evening, each of which occurs in a different space. “That way, in your
recollection, the fuzz of conversation doesn’t all kind of blur into itself, and
become just a single ‘it was fun,’ but instead you can remember specific
things that happened at each point. You go on a journey; there’s a
narrative,” he said.
AREA
The size of a gathering’s space should serve your purpose.
I once walked into a fortieth birthday party that had all the right
ingredients: a beautiful venue, delicious food, an open bar, a lively band,
and two hundred guests. But for some reason, I kept looking over my
shoulder all night, waiting for the party to begin. It felt like the room was
still empty even after all the guests had arrived. You had to physically walk
over to another part of the room to meet new people because everyone was
standing so far apart. I spent most of the night hanging out with a small
group of friends I already knew and didn’t take any social risks. Even when
the band came on, people congregated but hung back and didn’t dance.
What went wrong?
The space was too big. The room was gymnasium-sized. There was
never a moment when you accidentally bumped into someone, you turned
around and met someone new.
Another time, I was running a two-day gathering to brainstorm future
uses for the Presidio, a large park and former U.S. Army military fort in San
Francisco. The evening of the workshop, the Golden Gate National Parks
Conservancy opened the event to the public. People were invited to come
and hear presentations from museum educators across the country about
what makes an engaging space. We wanted to start with cocktails to warm
up the gathering and tried to embody what we were talking about.
As the guests started to arrive, one of the architects at the meeting
realized that the space where we were gathering was far too big to make it
feel like a cocktail party. Thinking on her feet, she took all the flip-chart
stands we had been working with throughout the day and placed them in a
semicircle that cordoned off a small section of the room. As people filtered
in, rather than taking over the entire space, they started to cluster together
between the flip charts and the classroom-style chairs that had been set up
for the talk. Within minutes, the place was hopping. The quick-thinking

architect had a sense of the right size of the area the group needed to gather
in and saved everyone from what might have been a disappointing and low-
energy event.
Just as we go into autopilot on the location of our weekly staff meetings,
we also tend to accept the default setup we’re given. If there’s a table in the
middle of the room, we leave it there. If the chairs are set up on two of the
four sides, we don’t move them, even though it would create more intimacy
if we did. So next time you’re in a gathering venue, remember that
something as simple as a few flip charts can allow you to transform the feel
of a room.
DENSITY
What the architect understood that night was the appropriate human
density for the event. And I have since learned that event planners and
space designers actually have rules of thumb for event density. Billy Mac,
an event planner, swears by the following parameters for the number of
square feet required per guest for different vibes:
Examples: Square Feet Per Guest
Sophisticated
Lively
Hot
Dinner party
20 sq. ft.
15 sq. ft.
N/A
Cocktail party
12 sq. ft.
10 sq. ft.
8 sq. ft.
Into the night/dance party
8 sq. ft.
6 sq. ft.
5 sq. ft.
Source: Apartment Therapy blog, https://www.apartmenttherapy.com/party-architecture-density-how-to-plan-a-party-5359.
He suggests dividing the “square feet of your party space by the number
to get your target number of guests.” If your entertaining space is 400
square feet and you want a sophisticated dinner party, invite 20 people. If,
instead, you want a “hot” dance party, invite 80 for that same space. Mac
says one of the reasons party guests often end up gravitating to the kitchen
is that people instinctively seek out smaller spaces as the group dwindles in
order to sustain the level of the density.

N
Three
Don’t Be a Chill Host
•       •       •
ow you know how to craft a bold and clear purpose for your
gathering and how to close doors based on it. The next step is to
think about your role as host. How will you run your gathering?
“CHILL” IS SELFISHNESS DISGUISED AS KINDNESS
When I raise the question of the host’s role to clients or friends, whether
in preparation for business meetings or family get-togethers, I am often
greeted with hesitancy. This is because to talk about their role is to talk
about their power as a host, and to talk about that power is to acknowledge
that it exists. This is not what most people want to hear. Many people who
go to the serious trouble of hosting aspire to host as minimally as possible.
But who wants to sail on a skipperless ship? Time and again, as in the
case of S., who was debating whether to do more with her dinner party, I
urge those I advise to own their power and lift a hand to the wheel. Time
and again, they resist.
I once was in Washington, D.C., helping organize a meeting about
poverty policy with a group of federal and state leaders. The hosts took my
suggestion to hold an intimate, single-conversation dinner the night before
the meeting, to give participants a chance to bond. The idea was for them to
go deep, take risks, and even shift their mindsets to make their policy
deliberations the following day more human.
After it was planned, one of the state leaders couldn’t make the dinner
but wanted to attend the meeting the next day. I strongly urged that the

organizers say no. The dinner wasn’t an aside; it was a core part of the
design of the gathering. The full group would have bonded, creating the
potential for an entirely different, more generative dynamic for the meeting.
Then one person who didn’t go through that process would show up a day
late and affect the entire group by her unchanged mindset. The four
organizers, averse to conflict and worried about upsetting an important
leader, resisted my advice. They wanted to let the state leader decide.
Finally, the senior woman in charge listened to me and told the state leader:
You are welcome at both parts of the gathering or neither part. She attended
neither. After the dinner, seeing the shift that had occurred in the group
through the meaningful personal conversation that evening, the organizers
understood why it would have then been disruptive to bring in an
uninitiated member the next morning.
On another occasion, I was at a housewarming party on a rooftop in
Brooklyn. After dinner, the gathering had hit a lull, with people milling
around, debating whether to leave or stay. I sensed this, and suggested to
the hosts a game of Werewolf, a dynamic, intense group game invented by a
Russian psychology professor that could bond the seated guests, reverse the
tide of ebbing energy, and spice up the night. One of the hosts seemed eager
to play the game and give the group a focus. She looked around and saw
some of her guests eager as well, and a small handful with skeptical looks
on their faces. The skepticism of this minority intimidated her, and she
abandoned the idea, not comfortable using her power as host to bring them
along. It was less a risk to do nothing. The moment passed, people broke up
into smaller groups, and we lost the critical mass. The next day, she texted
me that she wished we had played.
A journalist I know went to the trouble of gathering a dozen peers for a
ten-year reunion of their time as foreign correspondents. People came from
out of town to attend the dinner at a Thai restaurant in New York City. The
journalist is someone who had taken my advice in the past. And so, of his
own accord, he decided that he wanted at some point in the evening to
interrupt the sidebar conversations and invite everyone to reflect on what
that time abroad had meant to them. He wanted to create a moment of focus
that would activate the evening’s intended purpose. But at the last minute,
he backed down, fearing that the idea would be too domineering, or too
earnest, or both.

A ubiquitous strain of twenty-first-century culture is infecting our
gatherings: being chill. The desire to host while being noninvasive.
“Chill” is the idea that it’s better to be relaxed and low-key, better not to
care, better not to make a big deal. It is, in the words of Alana Massey’s
essay “Against Chill,” a “laid-back attitude, an absence of neurosis.” It
“presides over the funeral of reasonable expectations.” It “takes and never
gives.”
Let me declare my bias outright: Chill is a miserable attitude when it
comes to hosting gatherings.
In this chapter, I want to convince you to assume your proper powers as
a host. That doesn’t mean that there’s one way to host or one kind of power
to exert over your gathering. But I do believe that hosting is inevitably an
exercise of power. The hosts I guide often feel tempted to abdicate that
power, and feel that by doing so they are letting their guests be free. But this
abdication often fails their guests rather than serves them. The chill
approach to hosting is all too often about hosts attempting to wriggle out of
the burden of hosting. In gatherings, once your guests have chosen to come
into your kingdom, they want to be governed—gently, respectfully, and
well. When you fail to govern, you may be elevating how you want them to
perceive you over how you want the gathering to go for them. Often, chill is
you caring about you masquerading as you caring about them.
THE PROBLEM WITH CHILL
Behind the ethic of chill hosting lies a simple fallacy: Hosts assume that
leaving guests alone means that the guests will be left alone, when in fact
they will be left to one another. Many hosts I work with seem to imagine
that by refusing to exert any power in their gathering, they create a power-
free gathering. What they fail to realize is that this pulling-back, far from
purging a gathering of power, creates a vacuum that others can fill. Those
others are likely to exercise power in a manner inconsistent with your
gathering’s purpose, and exercise it over people who signed up to be at your
—the host’s—mercy, but definitely didn’t sign up to be at the mercy of your
drunk uncle.

Isn’t a host who lets people make their own fun, talk to whomever they
want to, the most generous kind of host? One of the most dramatic and
convincing rebuttals to that possible objection took place in a classroom.
Ronald Heifetz is a popular professor at the Harvard Kennedy School
and a well-known authority on leadership. On the first day of his class on
Adaptive Leadership, he begins in the most peculiar way. Instead of
walking into the room and taking attendance or launching into a lecture, he
sits in a black swivel chair in the front of the classroom and stares at the
ground with a blank, slightly bored look on his face. Dozens of students sit
in front of him. He doesn’t welcome any of them. He doesn’t clear his
throat. He doesn’t have one of his assistants introduce him. He just sits
there in silence, staring blankly, not moving an inch.
The students sit expectantly, waiting. The official start time of the class
passes, and Heifetz continues to sit there, not saying a word. The silence
grows heavier, more nerve-racking. By doing nothing, he is abdicating his
command of the classroom, refusing to play the expected role of professor-
host—presumably, in his case, given his area of scholarship, for some
reason we students do not yet grasp.
You can feel the collective nervousness growing by the second. One
person laughs. Somebody else coughs. There is a general, unspoken
confusion among the students. They are disoriented. When the professor,
the traditional classroom authority, doesn’t play his role, he removes the
guardrails of the classroom. The students are left to navigate the treacherous
road themselves.
Someone finally speaks, saying (as best I remember it): “I think this is
the class?”
With that, a popcornlike conversation, slow and measured at first, then
gathering pace and fervor, breaks out among roughly one hundred strangers:
“Is he just going to sit there?”
“I don’t have all day.”
“No, I think this is the point.”
“So what should we do?”
“Shhhh . . . Maybe he’s getting ready to speak.”
“Don’t shush me. I have every right to talk.”
Without the professor leading the way, the students must deal with one
another. Any of the hundred of them is, technically, free to speak (or yell or
dance or laugh or attempt to take charge). No one is stopping them. But

there are unspoken norms discouraging them from doing so. And even
when those norms are put to the test, as Heifetz is doing by hanging back,
each student has no idea how the others will react. Will one of them be
strong enough, charismatic enough, or logical enough to convince the
others what to do with the time? Or will they endlessly argue?
The popcorn of conversation goes on for what seems like an eternity but
is really about five minutes. Eventually, Heifetz looks up at the class and, to
everyone’s great relief, says, “Welcome to Adaptive Leadership.”
What is Heifetz doing? Launching a course on leadership by showing
students what happens when you abdicate leadership. You don’t eradicate
power. You just hand the opportunity to take charge to someone else—in
this case, the students. You are not easing their way or setting them free.
You are pumping them full of confusion and anxiety.
AUTHORITY IS AN ONGOING COMMITMENT
As hosts of gatherings, clients and friends of mine sometimes agree to
take charge. Their instinct is usually to do so once, early on in the
gathering, perhaps by giving an overview of the agenda, or by leading a
discussion about group norms, or by going over a set of instructions for a
group game. Then, as far as they are concerned, their work is done. Having
done their “hosting,” they can pretend to be guests.
But exercising your authority once and early on in a gathering is as
effective as exercising your body once and early on in your life. It isn’t
enough just to set a purpose, direction, and ground rules. All these things
require enforcement. And if you don’t enforce them, others will step in and
enforce their own purposes, directions, and ground rules.
I once attended a dinner thrown by one of the more purposeful hosts I
know. She seated her dozen or so guests around the table and then
suggested we get to know one another by guessing one another’s
occupations. She had seen it done at another gathering and thought it was
fun. We were game. She explained how it worked: Everyone at the table
gets a guess (unless you know the person), and then the person says what he
or she does for a living. We plunged in, making rather hilarious speculations
about the first person as he tried to maintain his poker face.

With the game off to a good start, as the guests seemed to find comfort
and laughter in one another, the host got up to get dinner ready. She must
have felt that her work was done: Her gathering was on autopilot now.
Leaving put her only ten or so paces from the table; it wasn’t as though she
had deserted us. But even this distance—more psychic than physical, since
she was now focused on something else and only faintly following the
game—created a problem. One of the guests, perhaps sensing the vacuum
or perhaps doing what he always does, began to suck up a disproportionate
amount of attention. He gave himself several guesses for each person
instead of the allotted one, and when that infraction went unticketed, he
began to ask follow-up questions to the guests after they revealed their
occupation.
The host’s (totally understandable) abdication had made space for a
pretender to the throne. Thanks to this pretender, we spent forty minutes on
just the first two people. It was completely unsustainable as a pace, and not
very interesting. The problem was that no one was invested in the game or
its rules besides the host. No one had even heard of the game before. When
the host set the game in motion and left, there was no one at the table to
enforce the game’s rules or the norms of brevity and equality that made it
work. But there was someone willing to enforce something—in this case, a
guest willing to enforce his own idea that the rest of the group would
benefit from hanging back a little and letting him conduct. He was wrong.
The man’s casual evening oppression is the perfect illustration of an old
quote from the political philosopher Isaiah Berlin: “Freedom for the wolves
has often meant death to the sheep.”
What ensued that evening was what so often happens when hosts fail to
exert their authority and to enforce it as an ongoing commitment: Many
guests get irritated. Some spoke up and, without explicitly maligning the
man or the exercise, suggested that we move on and just talk. That was a
good suggestion, but other guests were equally right in pointing out that this
approach wouldn’t be fair, since some people had now been elaborately
introduced to the group and others remained unknown. Even after retaking
her seat, the host laid low. We spent the entire night on the exercise. People
were grumbling throughout—grumbling being the preferred weapon of
guests who feel poorly governed and unprotected by their host.
So remember, if you’re going to compel people to gather in a particular
way, enforce it and rescue your guests if it fails.

And the next time you host a gathering and feel tempted to abdicate
even a little, examine the impulse. What is compelling you to hang back? If
it’s something logistical (like the need to heat up food or to step out and
take a call), you might find that a willing guest is much happier to get
assigned to play temporary “host” than to be oppressed by some friend of
yours for the better part of a night. Often, though, something deeper is at
work: a reluctance that you convince yourself is generous.
It’s not just with strangers at a dinner party that hosts abdicate their
power. I once advised a company that was suffering from painful quarterly
meetings because of a misunderstanding of generosity. Three-hour meetings
would turn into seven-hour marathons without anyone’s explicit consent.
Agendas would be built, only to be thrown out the window once the
executives actually gathered. The meetings would be diverted to one or two
topics that a few felt passionately enough about to advocate for in the
moment, and the rest didn’t feel passionately enough about to protest.
There was ostensibly an executive who was supposed to run these
meetings. But the problem was that the entire company was based on the
core value of equality. This executive would begin most meetings by going
over the agenda, but then, like our dinner host, hope the rest would take
care of itself. While the meetings might start on topic, inevitably one of the
executives would have a burning issue he or she would want to discuss, and
in trying to be generous to that peer, the host wouldn’t enforce the agenda.
And no one else would either, in part because the others didn’t think they
could if they were “equals.” Quarter after quarter, the participants left
meetings frustrated, having made few substantive decisions or pushed any
agenda forward. And though he was telling himself he was governing in a
generous manner, the host was also protecting himself. His underlying
belief was that in the current setup, even if the group was collectively worse
off for it, it did him no favors to rein in his fiercer colleagues. With no
source of enforcement, the meetings became dominated by informal sources
of power: tenure at the company, professional success, force of personality.
Is your laissez-faire approach really doing your guests the favor you
imagine it is? Does your agenda-free meeting help the young analyst? Or
does her chance of adding something useful to a discussion among seasoned
experts depend on her being able to prepare in advance? Does your talk-to-
whomever-you-want approach help the quiet guest speak at all if not given
a protected turn? Does open seating at a teachers conference help the three

newcomers who end up sitting clumped together at the end of the table
every time?
An essential step along the path of gathering better is making peace with
the necessity and virtue of using your power. If you are going to gather,
gather. If you are going to host, host. If you are going to create a kingdom
for an hour or a day, rule it—and rule it with generosity.
THE WONDERS OF GENEROUS AUTHORITY
At this point you may be wondering: If I am to rule my gathering, what
kind of ruler should I be?
The kinds of gatherings that meaningfully help others are governed by
what I call generous authority. A gathering run on generous authority is run
with a strong, confident hand, but it is run selflessly, for the sake of others.
Generous authority is imposing in a way that serves your guests. It spares
them from the chaos and anxiety that Heifetz knowingly thrust upon his
students. It spares them from the domination of some guests by other guests
that the dinner host unwittingly enabled. It wards off pretenders who
threaten a purpose. Sometimes generous authority demands a willingness to
be disliked in order to make your guests have the best experience of your
gathering.
But what does generous authority look like in the practice of gathering?
Generous authority is Richard Saul Wurman, the founder of the TED
conference, walking onstage in Monterey, California, holding a pair of
scissors. He walked toward Nicholas Negroponte, the founder of the MIT
Media Lab, a speaker, friend, and longtime attendee who, despite his
familiarity with its norms, had violated its policy forbidding neckties by
wearing one that day. Generous authority, in service of the larger gathering
and its values, compelled Wurman to approach Negroponte before he could
start his talk and theatrically cut off much of his tie. Which he did.
Generous authority is the comedian Amy Schumer facing down a
heckler at a comedy show—hecklers being a perfect example of those
pretender authorities waiting to rule if the host shows any weakness.
Someone yelled a non sequitur from the audience, “Where’d you get your
boots?” Schumer hit the heckler back hard: “On the corner of You Can’t

Afford Them and Stop Talking to Me.” She was funny, but she was also
implicitly using her power to prevent one heckler from ruining the show for
others.
Generous authority is Daisy Medici’s arduous effort to equalize who
gets to speak when wealthy families get together to make decisions and
plans. Medici is a financial adviser (with a very good name for a financial
adviser) who facilitates when the patriarchs and matriarchs of moneyed
families convene their extended tribes for what are often difficult
conversations. Generous authority is Medici’s awareness—and gentle
counterbalancing—of the tendency of in-laws often to stay silent, deferring
to the blood relatives, and of the elders to edge out their adult children, even
though it is those children who will live with the consequences of, say,
selling off a family business or giving money away.
Generous authority is not a pose. It’s not the appearance of power. It is
using power to achieve outcomes that are generous, that are for others. The
authority is justified by the generosity. When I tell you to host with
generous authority, I’m not telling you to domineer. I’m saying to find the
courage to be authoritative in the service of three goals.
PROTECT YOUR GUESTS
The first and perhaps most important use of your authority is the
protection of your guests. You may need to protect your guests from one
another, or from boredom, or from the addictive technologies that lurk in
our pockets, vibrating away. We usually feel bad saying no to someone. But
it can become easier when we understand who and what we are protecting
when we say no.
When it comes to using our power to protect guests, we could learn from
the Alamo Drafthouse, a movie theater chain founded in Austin, Texas, with
locations now in several cities. How many times have you been in a movie
theater, trying to watch the show, and one or two rows behind you are
people loudly stage-whispering to each other? Or the person next to you
takes out their phone and the radiating white light competes with the big
screen? How bad does it have to get for you to say something? Perhaps you

say something and nothing happens. Perhaps you say something and a
conflict breaks out, ruining the movie for even greater numbers of people.
What sets the Alamo apart, in addition to its large seats and its food and
beverage service during the show, is that it practices generous authority.
Most movie theaters, like so many hosts, focus primarily on their own host-
guest relationship, overlooking the audience’s internal relationships: that of
guest to guest. The Alamo does not make this mistake. Someone there
seems to have realized that other theaters outsource the role of enforcer to
their patrons, which is a role a paying customer should not have to play.
And so when you watch a film at the Alamo, you see an announcement that
warns you not to text or talk during the show, which many theaters have.
But here’s the clincher: If you do, you will get one warning by the staff. If
you do it a second time, you will “be ejected.” And if you, as a customer,
see another customer breaking one of the rules, you can simply put up your
“order card” at your table and the theater will take care of it. (Customers
also write down food orders on the same card to signal the waiter, so the
anonymity of the snitch is safe.) The waiters deliver on the promise by
serving as enforcers. I can attest that they do their job.
When one guest was kicked out for texting, she left an angry voicemail
on the theater’s machine: “I’ve texted in all the other theaters in Austin and
no one ever gave a fuck.” She continued, “You guys, obviously, were being
assholes to ME.” She went on and on, ending with “And I’m pretty sure
you’re being an asshole on purpose. So thanks for making me feel like a
customer! Thanks for taking my money, asshole!”
The Alamo, confident in the generosity of its authority, reveled in the
message. The company turned the voicemail into an advertisement. It ended
with the words “Thanks for not coming back to the Alamo, TEXTER!” The
ad went viral. The company’s CEO, Tim League, explained the company’s
policy and strict enforcement of it: “When you are in a cinema, you are one
of many, many people in the auditorium. When the lights go dark and the
movie begins, every single movie fan in the room wants to be absorbed into
and get lost in the flickering images on the screen. A light from a cellphone,
a screaming baby or a disruptive teen cracking jokes all pull you out of the
magic of the movies. Providing an awesome experience for true movie fans
is the reason we opened the first Alamo Drafthouse back in the mid-’90s,
and it is the exact same philosophy we adhere to today.”

What sets the Alamo apart from other theaters is not the fact that it has a
no-talking and no-texting policy. It is, rather, that it pledges in a detailed
way to enforce those policies and that its employees faithfully do. And the
Alamo is willing to face the wrath of its guests. Its employees use their
authority to protect the other guests and the larger purpose of their
gathering. The Alamo, contrary to the texter’s voicemail rant, isn’t “being
an asshole on purpose.” Rather, it is working to protect the purpose of the
gathering: to enjoy the magic of the movies.
The theater has created a separate program, Alamo for All, where it lifts
the noise and technology rules entirely and allows people to move around
during the movie. The theater hosts these film experiences to serve a
different purpose: to create a radically inclusive, accessible movie theater
for children (including crying babies) and guests with special needs.
Because the Alamo knows the needs of some patrons can be at odds with
those of others, it has created two separate gatherings that serve two
separate purposes: one to protect its guests from noise and distraction, the
other to protect its guests from exclusion and inaccessibility.
To protect your guests in this way can be challenging, because the anger
of the shushed is concentrated, while the gratitude of the protected is
diffuse. Anyone who has ever moderated a panel—that most lamentable of
gatherings—knows the feeling. But very talented moderators like David
Gergen, the CNN political commentator and consigliere to many American
presidents—get used to the idea of taking one for the team, even if the team
doesn’t even realize what is being done on their behalf. When Gergen hosts
a panel and Q&A time comes, he often instructs the audience: “If you
would, identify yourself, be fairly succinct, and remember that a question
ends with a question mark.” When an audience member inevitably begins
making a long statement, Gergen interrupts repeatedly if need be: “Can you
put that into a question? . . . Can you put that into a question? . . . Is this
leading to a question?” It may seem to some that he is being mean, but in
fact he is protecting the rest of the audience who waited or paid to hear
from the head of state or a famous author or a political activist, not a fellow
audience member.
That is protecting your guests: anticipating and intercepting people’s
tendencies when they’re not considering the betterment of the whole of the
group or the experience. The questioner at a panel who makes a statement
often doesn’t realize that she is making a statement, as odd as that might

seem. The relentless self-promoter at a cocktail party probably wouldn’t
sound the way he does if he could hear himself. People aren’t setting out to
be bad people at your gatherings; bad behavior happens. But it’s your job as
a host—kindly, graciously, but firmly—to ward it off.
A few years ago, Elizabeth Stewart realized that she would have no
choice but to step up in this way. She was the founding director of Impact
Hub Los Angeles, which is part business incubator and part community
center. Even though the organization she ran was about the growing of
businesses and the nurturing of entrepreneurs, Stewart knew “that we had to
guard against the transactional relationships that permeated the start-up
coworking spaces.” She continued, “I knew we had to be different through
ground rules and setting up norms that supported something different.” So
Stewart introduced a rule in all Hub LA membership orientations: Members
could only talk about what they “sold” if someone asked for help or asked
about what they did. She was protecting her guests from being seen only as
potential customers or investors and protecting the gathering from
becoming crass. “It had to be about people getting to know each other as
people first and foremost and sharing their ideas second. That’s where the
rule came from. We tried to create a culture that was sensitive to inquiry
and invitation,” she said.
Protecting your guests doesn’t have to consist of loud interruptions or
fierce rules. It can be done through small, almost unnoticeable interventions
that happen throughout a gathering: rescuing a guest from a long, one-sided
conversation in the corner of your party; shutting down a domineering
employee at work with a joke; asking someone to stop texting.
Protecting your guests is, in short, about elevating the right to a great
collective experience above anyone’s right to ruin that experience. It’s about
being willing to be a bad cop, even if it means sticking your neck out. And
it’s generous, because you’re doing it for your guests so that, as at the
Alamo Drafthouse, they don’t have to.
EQUALIZE YOUR GUESTS
Another vital use of a host’s authority is to temporarily equalize your
guests. In almost any human gathering there will be some hierarchy, some

difference in status, imagined or real, whether between a sales vice
president and a new associate at an all-hands meeting or between a teacher
and a parent at back-to-school night. Most gatherings benefit from guests
leaving their titles and degrees at the door. However, the coat check for their
pretenses is you. If you don’t hang them up, no one else will.
Thomas Jefferson understood that. The United States was, in his mind, a
bold bet against inherited hierarchy. Jefferson was wise enough to
understand that this ideal of equality should not remain an abstract concept.
It should also dictate how he and other American leaders lived their lives—
and, yes, organized their gatherings. Jefferson believed a new republic
needed new protocols.
One of these new protocols involved the seating of dinner guests. A
dinner party was a formalized affair in European society, where people were
seated according to rank—all the more so in official and diplomatic
settings. Jefferson got rid of this tradition, declaring, “At public ceremonies,
to which the government invites the presence of foreign ministers and their
families, a convenient seat or station will be provided for them, with any
other strangers invited and the families of the national ministers, each
taking place as they arrive, and without any precedence.” Seating people
“pell-mell,” as it was called, offended some people who had enjoyed the
benefits of status, including a British minister to the United States named
Anthony Merry. Merry, his “large and equally offended wife,” and another
diplomat all withdrew from official Washington society. According to The
Thomas Jefferson Encyclopedia, “The ensuing social tempest came close to
clouding the course of American foreign and domestic policy, but Jefferson
stood firmly behind the principle at the root of pell-mell: ‘When brought
together in society, all are perfectly equal, whether foreign or domestic,
titled or untitled, in or out of office.’” He wanted his gatherings to reflect
this ethos. (Unfortunately, the ethos didn’t extend to his slaves.)
More than two centuries later, another American president sought in his
own way to equalize people and he, too, ruffled feathers, and got a few
laughs, when he did. President Barack Obama noticed that men were far
more likely to both raise their hands and be called on in public question-
and-answer settings. So he started an experiment. Whether addressing
students at Benedict College, workers in Illinois, or even his own press
corps, he would insist on taking questions in “boy, girl, boy, girl” fashion. If

no woman stood up with a question when the women’s turn came, Obama
would wait until one did.
You don’t have to be the leader of the free world to equalize your guests.
You just have to be aware of the power dynamics at your gathering and be
willing to do something about them—as were the founders of the
Opportunity Collaboration conference.
The conference was started in Ixtapa, Mexico, in 2009 to bring together
leaders “dedicated to building sustainable solutions to poverty.” From the
beginning, the hosts knew they were up against formidable power dynamics
in the anti-poverty field: the organizations with the grant money held much
more power than the grantees who implemented the programs on the
ground. The organizers believed this dynamic thwarted the work of
reducing poverty. As Topher Wilkins, the conference’s CEO, explained to
me, “When I attend a traditional conference, it’s like fingernails on a
chalkboard.” He added, “I think they do more harm than good. It’s
promoting the same hierarchy that leads to how economic development gets
done, and it’s that structure that we actually need to break down if we’re
going to solve these problems in the first place.”
Wilkins and his team set out to design a gathering that would
counterbalance rather than reinforce the hierarchy between donors and
grantees. They invited 350 people to spend a week together in Mexico, and
they spared no opportunity to embed equality into the gathering. They used
nametags with first names in giant letters and last names in small letters,
and—heaven forbid—they did not include organizational affiliations. They
began the conference with a three-hour town hall, giving attendees a chance
to “witness who we are as a community,” Wilkins said, and “very openly
talk about the things that are preventing us from working together in the
first place.” People seized on the chance to speak truth to one another and to
power. Grantees said things like “Every time I go to a potential funder, it’s
like going to the gynecologist. You have to show them everything!” Donors
responded: “I hear that, and it’s really horrible. For me, it’s also difficult
because I have to make decisions that change people’s lives, and there’s a
lot of responsibility and stress around that.” The organizers even had people
role-play the grievances of the other side to foster empathy.
Opportunity Collaboration had a larger purpose in mind: to solve the
problem of poverty by equipping those who fight it to do so more
effectively. That greater effectiveness, the organizers felt, would come from

greater openness, greater collaboration, and, above all, greater equality. So
after picking the location and guests, these organizers knew that they
needed to claim their own power as hosts capable of equalizing their guests.
If they could make the different tribes of anti-poverty warriors stand on
level ground and hear one another democratically, perhaps they could begin
to change how the field works in general.
This democratization of gatherings isn’t just for presidential occasions
and poverty conferences. Many parties and other social events could benefit
from some assertive equalizing. It was in part because the writer Truman
Capote understood this that he was able to make his Black and White Ball
such a great splash.
On November 28, 1966, the Monday after Thanksgiving, Capote invited
540 of his “closest friends” to the Plaza Hotel in New York for a masked
ball. It was unlike any party the city’s society had ever seen. Not because of
its lavishness (the invitation was for 10 p.m., and spaghetti and hash would
be served at midnight). Not even because of the location. But because of
who attended, and what they were told to wear.
Capote invited princesses and politicians, Hollywood stars and writers.
The party was held in honor of Katharine Graham, which was itself an
unusual move as she was a recent widow. Although she would go on to run
The Washington Post during two of its most consequential decades, she was
relatively unknown at that moment. Capote, whose bestselling book In Cold
Blood had recently been published, invited the maharani of Jaipur and the
Italian princess Luciana Pignatelli, as well as the middle-class family from
Garden City, Kansas, who had hosted him while he was doing research for
the book. And in addition to mixing all these worlds, he asked everyone to
wear masks. “There was something radically democratic in the notion of
inviting these very famous people to a party and then telling them to hide
their faces,” said Deborah Davis, an author who has studied the ball.
For Capote, who loved a good party, the role of the masks was a
deliberate act of subversion. As celebrities streamed in, the act of blocking
their faces, even if just a little, created a parity that rarely existed in their
social universe. (He even had thirty-nine-cent masks on hand for the guests
who “forgot” theirs, to enforce the rule, Alamo Drafthouse–like.) The guest
list was sent to The New York Times the next day, and the symbolism of all
those people in the same room shook up people’s notions of who and how
people could mix.

CONNECT YOUR GUESTS
A third use of generous authority is in connecting your guests to one
another. One measure of a successful gathering is that it starts off with a
higher number of host-guest connections than guest-guest connections and
ends with those tallies reversed, far in the guest-guest favor.
As with the protecting and equalizing, the connecting of guests is
something that no one is against in theory. Who doesn’t want their guests to
come away from a gathering having gotten to know one another? But the
question, once again, is whether you are willing to use your authority and
stick your neck out in order to make those connections happen. Whether
you are willing to risk looking like a fool, or going too far, or even
annoying people, in order to foster the linkages you claim to believe in.
I was once facilitating a one-day conference on a working farm. The
topic was the future of grass-fed beef, and the organizers had convened
about 120 people who were involved in different aspects of the grass-fed
beef ecosystem. At the time, grass-fed beef represented a tiny percentage of
the beef sold in the United States, and the organizers had invited people
who wanted to see that percentage grow. In the room were ranchers,
farmers, investors, beef buyers from grocery chains and delis, chefs, and
consumer advocates. But they didn’t all know one another, and in some
cases, they had very different reasons for being there.
The organizers had scheduled a day full of panels, speakers, and updates
from the field. But we knew that a key element in making them think of
themselves as a group would be to build their sense of community. By the
end of the day, we wanted them to feel as though they could pick up the
phone and call anyone else in the room. So I set myself the goal of figuring
out how to provide each participant with an opportunity for meaningful
small-group conversations with at least three-quarters of the other guests.
Yet the only way I could think of to actually do this was to have them get up
and move to a different table after every speaker. It was a hassle, and people
often resist packing up their belongings and moving.
Nonetheless, we decided to do it. After every speaker and every coffee
break, I reminded them that it’s hard to build a movement if you don’t know
who’s in it. So each person had to move to a different table. At their new
ten-seat tables, they would have a chance to introduce themselves to new
people and answer a question relevant to the day or the most recent speaker.

In order to deliver on the larger purpose of connecting the group, I had to be
willing to face a few grumbles about moving belongings and not being able
to talk to friends. I had to operate as a representative of their future selves—
happy they met new people, surprised by new connections with people
unlike themselves—and actively go against what their present selves
demanded.
By the end of the day, the mood at the gathering was anything but
grumpy. In fact, it had turned festive. A number of participants approached
me and said that they had never before felt so connected to so many new
people so quickly. We had gone through a lot of technical information about
the grass-fed beef industry, but we hadn’t sacrificed connection on the altar
of our agenda. We believed we could do both. And we did.
The moral of this story is that connection doesn’t happen on its own.
You have to design your gatherings for the kinds of connections you want to
create. And, again, it doesn’t have to be elaborate and complicated. I once
heard of a couple who found a clever way to seed connection among their
wedding guests. At the entrance to the reception, they left a hint to each
guest to seek out another specific guest they were told shared one similar
interest—for example, to find the avid skier who once quit a management
consulting job to become a ski instructor. They knew that, absent such
instructions, friends and family who knew one another would seek one
another out and stick together.
Some intentional gatherers actually encourage these guest-guest
connections to form in advance of the event itself. Chris Anderson, who
now runs TED, recently started a new tradition. Some weeks before the big
conference he throws in Vancouver, he hosts a dinner for speakers based in
New York who are in the final days of writing and memorizing what are
supposed to be “the talks of their life.” Before the dinner, those speakers are
all connected individually to him or one of his colleagues. After the dinner,
they are connected to one another. They become a tribe who can navigate
the sometimes intimidating halls of the massive conference. A grueling and
intimidating process becomes less scary, and a gathering becomes more
intimate. One group of speakers who were brought together in this way still
gather from time to time in one another’s homes well after the conference,
because they found such kinship in one another.

HALF-GERMAN, HALF-EGYPTIAN AUTHORITY
I have encouraged you to own your power as a host, and to do so not to
aggrandize yourself but to protect, equalize, and connect your guests. Now I
want to talk about one of my favorite role models for generous authority:
Nora Abousteit.
Abousteit is an entrepreneur living in New York City. Born in a small
town in Germany to a German mother and an Egyptian father (the one who
started the students-only bar), she has spent her career building
communities of people who make things by hand. The founder of CraftJam,
an organizer of social crafting events, Abousteit gathers in the course of
doing this work, and she gathers in her personal life. A lot.
She is, you could say, an extreme gatherer. She hosts and attends more
gatherings than most people I know, and she hosts more generously and
seriously as well. Abousteit will think nothing of gathering forty people in
her home for a banquet multiple times a year. She cohosts large dinners on
the eves of conferences around the world. She hosts regular brunches for
anyone who happens to be in town on a Saturday. Her home has an open-
door policy, and she hosts friends of friends, even if she has never met
them, to give them a temporary sense of belonging while they navigate a
new city. In all she does, she incarnates generous authority—protecting,
equalizing, connecting.
Abousteit uses her authority to protect her guests in ways small and
large. At her formal seated dinners, she informs guests that they can’t show
up late. “People warm up together,” she tells me. “They get to a certain
point, and there’s a certain kind of energy, and it’s a collective experience.”
By letting people come whenever they want, Abousteit understands that she
would be failing to protect those who showed up on time. In that same
spirit, if two friends are in a corner catching up with each other and
ignoring the rest of the group, Abousteit has no problem saying to them,
“Catch up on your own time.” She is protecting those who may not have the
luxury of catch-up buddies at the dinner, and whose chance of having a
good time depends on other people being open to conversation with a
stranger.
She equalizes her guests by holding everyone to the same standards. At
one banquet she hosted, she ended the evening by suggesting that the group
of forty go around the table with each person sharing a single piece of

culture, broadly defined, that truly moved them that year. She insisted that
each person get only sixty seconds to do so. And then she equalized her
guests by enforcing that sixty-second rule mercilessly. Whether it was her
mother-in-law, her husband’s colleague, or a high school friend, at sixty
seconds, Abousteit said, “Time’s up,” and the group moved on.
Abousteit connects her guests to one another as if it’s her job. At one
party she hosted, as friends streamed up the stairs to the main room, she
stood at the top with a big smile on her face, welcomed each guest, and told
them that she loves nothing more in the world than the people she loves
meeting one another, and that they have one job before dinner: make two
new friends. And because she’s so authentic and explicit about it, people
make an effort to talk to new people, in part because she’s given them the
social cover to do so.
One way Abousteit helps her guests connect is by priming them to take
care of one another. When she gathers a large group of people who are
sitting at separate tables, she assigns roles to a guest at each table, which
gives them something to do and an excuse to talk to the others around them.
A “Water Minister” ensures that everyone has full glasses of water. A
“Wine Minister” keeps the wine flowing. At another dinner, with people
seated banquet-style next to others they didn’t know, when the food arrived
in big bowls, she explicitly invited her guests to “serve each other and not
worry about getting served themselves.” She explained: “In Egypt, we
always serve one another first. When that happens, everyone gets food.
You’re not worried about yourself.” Abousteit laughingly admits that she
plays the Egyptian when greater warmth is required and it’s helpful to be
Egyptian, and she plays the German when greater order is required and it’s
helpful to be German. That night, the guests, a bit startled but also
intrigued, began lifting bowls of quinoa salad to serve one another,
everyone looking around to see if their dinner mates had gotten enough
food. This small reorientation shifted the dynamic of the room. Instead of
worrying about themselves, the guests relaxed and started to look out for
everyone else. She had nudged people into relationships of care, even
though many of them had just met.
Abousteit understands that generous authority is a commitment, and that
she must sustain the protecting, equalizing, and connecting of her guests
throughout the event. And it was this commitment, and the bewildered

pushback it invited, that came to a head at the most important gathering of
Abousteit’s life: her wedding.
She had spent days with seating charts designing what she thought were
perfect tables. They were low tables, in the Egyptian style, covered with
multicolored silk cloths under a beautiful, enclosed tent. She sat groups of
six people together at thirty tables. She chose a smaller number than many
do for wedding tables because she was more interested in group intimacy
than group energy. She was marrying an American who works in China
much of the time, and because she herself hailed from multiple places, the
guests were from many different countries. At the tables, she tried to put
together people who were different but somehow complementary. She
considered the dynamics between individuals and the table’s potential
conversations as a whole. And to the dismay of some of her guests, she
followed German tradition and separated couples by putting them at
different tables.
At one point during the evening, Abousteit, looking stunning in her
black-and-white wedding dress, walked around proudly, admiring her
handiwork, visiting each table to greet her guests. Her deepest desire was
coming true: the disparate parts of her life were melting into a tribe.
Suddenly, she noticed something amiss: “I saw a couple where the woman
was actually sitting on her husband’s lap, telling him that she missed him. I
was confused why this one table was different. I could tell right away, just
from looking at the people, that the entire energy of the table was off.” To
the surprise and dismay of that guest, Abousteit walked over and marched
her guest back to her original table.
Why had the aberration in her seating arrangements upset her so much?
“They were breaking harmony,” Abousteit explained. “They were only
thinking about themselves and their own needs and not about the group. In
a group, if everybody thinks about the other person’s needs, everyone’s
needs are actually fulfilled in the end. But if you only think about yourself,
you are breaking that contract.” She continued: “I was really upset because
it’s not fair to the other people at the table.” In that moment, Abousteit was
thinking not about the guest who had departed from the seating order so
much as the guests who were left behind. Obviously, none of her guests was
going to get up and ask the guest to return—even if the absence did alter the
dynamics at a rather small table.

The guest whom Abousteit shame-marched found her behavior
authoritarian. But Abousteit saw it as being protective of the five people
who were left at the table. In her mind, the dinner was a short part of a long
evening, the only portion where couples were separated, and it was
specifically designed to help her guests connect and interstitch the many
disparate stories there.
When you are on the wrong end of one of Abousteit’s gathering
commands, it isn’t fun. But I have never had any doubt about why she is
ruling her gathering. It is always for the sake of her guests.
One of my favorite gathering documents is an email that Abousteit once
wrote to a friend, offering tips for throwing a dinner on the sidelines of the
South by Southwest Conference. It leaves no doubt about where her heart
is:
1. YOU ARE THE BOSS. Hosting is not democratic, just like
design isn’t. Structure helps good parties, like restrictions help
good design.
2. Introduce people to each other A LOT. But take your time with it.
3. Be generous. Very generous with food, wine, and with
compliments/introductions. If you have a reception before people
sit, make sure there are some snacks so blood sugar level is kept
high and people are happy.
4. ALWAYS do placement. Always. Placement MUST be
boy/girl/boy/girl, etc. And no, it does not matter if someone is
gay. Seat people next to people who do different things but that
those things might be complementary. Or make sure they have
something else in common; a passion or something rare is best.
And tell people what they have in common.
5. Within each table, people should introduce themselves, but it must
be short. Name, plus something they like or what they did on the
weekend or maybe something that can relate to the gathering.
6. For dessert, people can switch, but best to have it organized: tell
every other person at the table to move to another seat.
I love this list for how it distills the ethos of generous authority. In
almost every instruction two things are embedded: compassion and order.

WHEN AUTHORITY TURNS UNGENEROUS
I’m sure you’ve been to many gatherings governed under the doctrine of
chill. Conferences in which the “questioner” before you in line deprives you
of the opportunity to ask something because his “question” turns out to be a
soliloquy spanning two typed pages, and the moderator doesn’t stop him.
School-welcome picnics at which not so much as an opening announcement
is made, leaving you wondering if you are actually at the school picnic or
just a crowded portion of the park. Dinner parties at which you become an
expert in start-ups—or at least the start-up of the really talkative guy next to
you.
I’m also certain, though, that you’ve been to another, very different kind
of gathering: one in which you felt not unattended or abandoned, but rather
controlled, bossed around, taken for granted, even tricked—and very clearly
for the sake of the host, not anyone else. Ungenerous anarchy—a.k.a. chill
—is not the only enemy of generous authority. There’s also the problem of
ungenerous authority, to which we now turn.
If the sin of the chill host is leaving people alone for his or her own sake,
the sin of the domineering host is controlling people for his or her own
sake. It is running your gathering with an iron fist, and doing so in a way
that is in service, above all, of yourself. Though there are no hard and fast
rules, in my own experience, it is institutional gatherings that more often err
on the side of ungenerous authority, the bureaucratic need for predictability
translating into a rigidity that doesn’t serve guests. It is personal gatherings
that more often suffer from the problem of chill. That said, I have been to
ungenerously anarchic institutional gatherings and ungenerously
authoritarian personal ones. You never know.
The host most likely to succumb to ungenerous authority is the one who
fears losing control. It is in the obsession with knowing how events will
play out that we often make them go poorly for the guest, for the sake of
calming ourselves. This was the case at one gathering I helped put together:
the formal launch of the Obama administration’s new Office of Social
Innovation and Civic Participation, in the summer of 2009.
It was a new office, dedicated to a new idea: that sometimes the role of
government is not to solve problems directly, but rather to play conductor to
the orchestra of solution chasers around the country. The founding of the
office sent a message that Obama, a former community organizer, didn’t

just believe in local solutions and active citizenship in theory. He was
building an institution tasked with harnessing and promoting those ideas.
We wondered: What was the best way to launch such an office? This
wasn’t like launching a Treasury Department sub-agency. Our office
represented new values and a new theory of where good ideas came from,
and this deserved a different kind of launch. We made plans for an
interactive conversation among President Obama and one hundred leaders
in the social innovation sector. It was a rare gathering where the icons of the
field would all be in one room—and a room in the White House, no less.
Members of our team recommended doing a live, dynamic, fishbowl
conversation where each guest could step in and out of the dialogue circle at
timed intervals while engaging with the president. But when we took our
plans to the Office of Public Engagement, the gatekeeper for all public-
facing gatherings, the staff there shot down every element of the gathering
that was unscripted, that had any element of risk.
“We never know what he might say if it’s unscripted,” we were told of
the president.
The event ended up being traditional—a highly scripted speech with
guests seated in classroom-style rows in the East Room of the White House.
What might have been an event that pushed forward a field and embodied
its purpose—to look out to the community for solutions to the nation’s
problems—ended up being a staid, top-down ceremony. Because of the
organizers’ fear, it was an excessively controlled gathering. The organizers
had claimed their authority, but their authority did not feel generous. Rather
than protecting their guests, they seemed motivated to protect their own
jobs. Rather than connecting the invited leaders to one another, they had
them listen to the president and three other speakers. In the organizers’
mind, the perceived upside (galvanizing a group of leaders around the
president’s new innovative initiative) was not worth the risk of the
perceived downside (the president making some offhand comment that
might cause other problems). This risk factor is among the biggest reasons
many institutional gatherings leave the generosity out of their authority.
If timidity can make gatherers ungenerous, so does navel-gazing. I have
a friend in the fashion industry who once invited me to a fancy gathering to
celebrate the 250th anniversary of a liquor company. While the gathering
overflowed with all the right ingredients for a swanky and memorable night
—a welcome cocktail, performance artists, a red carpet, a celebrity

appearance, models as waiters, and a tantalizing menu—it quickly became a
self-serving disaster—even though on the surface it appeared very
generous.
There was one drink on offer: a strong cocktail made from the brand’s
liquor. There were no alternatives except water. As we were waiting for our
drinks, we were strongly encouraged, repeatedly, to move into the main
dining area as the program was going to begin. At least we would be given
some food to counterbalance the liquor, we thought, only to discover that
the food would be served only after a presentation. We had been invited to a
7 p.m. dinner, but the meal wasn’t served until close to 10 p.m. There was
an MC managing the show, but there was only so much he could do: It was
clear he was following a script. As the guests sat quietly, staring at the
stage, without food or drink, the hosts showed video after video explaining
the work of the tasting committee, whatever that was. We learned about the
seven generations of family members that contributed to the legacy of this
liquor.
As far as I could tell, few of us had arrived cynical of this event or of
this brand. As the night wore on, I started noticing guests texting under the
table, rolling their eyes, mock-eating their own arms. There began to erupt a
small, if subtle, revolt. The experience of the audience was being totally
ignored. By having us sit at specific tables, with no real way to move or get
up or go anywhere, and with little opportunity to talk to one another, they
were certainly using their authority. But what they gave us in return did not
justify the freedom they were asking us to give up.
When the food finally came out, the hosts were so focused on the beauty
of the delivery that they forgot the practical considerations of a roomful of
hungry guests. For each table, a SWAT team of waiters marched out in a
straight line, holding the plates, and then surrounded the table all together
and served the course à la française (simultaneously to every guest). But the
problem was that this process took a lot of time, and there were many, many
tables to be served.
The printed menus on the table had filled me with excitement for the
moment that was now, at last, coming. There would be, for saffron lovers,
“Saffron Potato Crisp” and “Crab and Saffron Maki,” “Scallop and Saffron
Cream” and “Saffron Poultry.” There would be “Cocoa Salmon” and
“Chocolate and Mango Pie.” When I finally got my plate, though, I was
surprised to see how little there was on it. As we raised our forks to eat, the

organizers now scolded us not to eat any of the “food” until the four
members of the tasting committee came onstage to explain each dish that
we were supposed to eat with the drink. First, they said it in French, and
then it was translated into English. It was clear that it was important to the
company that all four of these people were represented onstage.
I finally just started eating. I was done in five minutes, and looked
around to see if I could get a second plate. No luck. What could have been a
fun, interesting evening turned into a night to make fun of the hosts.
At this point, I and others grasped the deeper reasons for this dreary
gathering: The event’s purpose was to honor a small number of people. This
was a celebration of the liquor company, by the liquor company, and for the
liquor company. Everyone else was a prop. The evening was all form, no
function. They hadn’t woven us into their story, and we didn’t feel a part of
it.
The difference between Abousteit’s imposition and the liquor company’s
imposition is this: Abousteit’s authority was not about her. At her
gatherings, the heavy hand demonstrably makes the gathering better for
guests. She’s not doing it to be the star. She’s doing it so that each person
gets an equal chance to be a star, to enjoy the evening, to come away
slightly altered by the moment. With the liquor company organizers, the
guests became the unwitting audience of a bad show. As one guest wrote to
me later, “Why were we gathered? What purpose? What was the red thread
that tied it all together?” He continued, “They forgot to do the basics: Frame
the event. Here is why we are here.”
The organizers neither connected the guests to one another, nor
protected the guests from anyone, including themselves. In fact, they were
the oppressors. And they forced the audience to protect themselves.
If you are going to hold your guests captive, you had better do it well.
When a host fails to exercise power, the authority that pops up instead can
be annoying, but it is hard to pin down. It comes from fellow guests whose
names you may not even know. When a host exercises power badly, on the
other hand, the anger has a clear focus. The wrath knows where to go.
HOW I RUINED THAT DINNER

So as a host, how do you get your power right? How do you not
abandon your guests while ensuring that your power serves them? How do
you strike that balance? Or to put the question in more personal terms: How
could I have done it better that night I ruined dinner?
It was a dinner that my husband and I were hosting for ten guests. It was
originally planned around a couple we wanted to have over, in part because
they host us quite often. (I know: not a good purpose.) We then added six
other friends to the evening. Some of the guests knew one another
professionally, but not well; others had never met. It was an
intergenerational group, ranging from people in their twenties to people in
their seventies. My original intention was to be a cool, laissez-faire host. I
would be unobtrusive. As each guest arrived, my husband or I let them in,
poured them a drink, and led them to the living room, where there were
nibbles arrayed on a small coffee table, surrounded by a circle of chairs and
a sofa.
I thought that introducing people who already knew one another a bit
might seem heavy-handed or overly orchestrated, and I was trying to create
a relaxed tone for the evening. Each guest found a spot around the circle
and then remained in it for much of the next hour, talking in small groups.
The energy was low, and it felt a little forced. I was surprised because I
thought the group would have enough in common to spark easy
conversation.
I started to get nervous.
We invited people to move to the table for dinner, and at that point, one
of the guests pulled me aside and said, “Can you please introduce us? There
haven’t been any introductions.” In trying not to impose, I had left my
guests underequipped.
I decided to reverse myself and take charge of the evening. I welcomed
everyone and raised a glass. I thanked each of them for “sprinkling fairy
dust on our family” in different ways over the previous year. Then I
attempted to make an introduction of every guest. I hadn’t planned what I
was going to say, so I tried to wing it. I embarrassed the first guest in trying
to honor her: I said something like “This date was chosen months out
because of Elise’s crazy calendar.” She blushed, while everyone else looked
a little wounded, thinking they were runners-up. Then I went around and
tried saying something about each guest, but I messed up the details and
was repeatedly corrected. “He grew up in Tennessee,” I would venture.

“Actually, Georgia,” the guest said. I introduced some of the guests
professionally, but other guests based on a personality trait. It got so bad
that one guest said, “Hey, you said something about everyone’s profession
except for Zeb’s.” Then, as I became more flustered, I realized I wasn’t sure
of that person’s current work, so I asked him to expound. I took forty-five
minutes to do these introductions. My husband was cueing me to stop, but it
was no use: I couldn’t do half the group and leave the other half out. My
husband finally had to tell people to please start eating while I finished the
introductions.
In trying to course-correct, I swung from unstructured to tyrannical—
from an anarchy that didn’t serve my guests to an authority that didn’t serve
them either. And I did both badly. I could have addressed the need for
introductions in a number of creative ways: letting people ask each other
questions, having partners introduce each other, asking each person to
answer one fun question. But I did none of that. Instead, I took over without
any forethought. And my mode of introduction neither connected the guests
to one another nor provided paths to a group conversation.
The rest of the night was clunky at best. A few guests dominated the
conversation. I would try to redirect it, but still raw from my introduction
flop, I was gun-shy. I don’t believe the guests left feeling particularly
connected to one another. The conversation was disjointed. People fled
right after dessert was served, saying they were tired. (Never a good sign
when your guests say they are tired at 9 p.m.) I woke up the next morning
feeling embarrassed and regretful.
I had tried out two kinds of authority that night, both of them wrong. I
left people alone. And then I ruled them illegitimately. What could I have
done better?
I could have started before the gathering even began. In my reminder
email to the group the day before, I could have easily included a little fun
background on each person, which they could read on their own time to get
a sense of who would be there. As they walked in, I could have connected
them, making a point of bringing each person around, even though it was a
small group, and introducing them warmly to one another, saying a few nice
things about each, as Abousteit’s list advises.
Once at the table, if I was going to do introductions, I could have
prepared better so that my comments would be warm and interesting and,
more important, accurate and egalitarian. I could have found one beautiful

detail about each person that no one knew. Or I could have asked a question
at the beginning of the meal to connect the group, something like “What is
on your mind for the year ahead for yourself? For the world?” And then,
harnessing my inner Abousteit, I could have made sure that everyone
answered it.
Briefly.

S
Four
Create a Temporary Alternative
World
•       •       •
ometimes you need to spice things up.
So far, we have explored how to anchor your gathering in a
meaningful purpose. How to close doors on the basis of that
purpose. And how to be a host who takes care of your guests by taking the
right kind of charge. These decisions will give your gathering a solid
foundation.
Many of the people I work with don’t realize they need to do this
foundational work. I have to convince them to go back to basics. The
question they often come to me with instead is the one we turn to now, and
we can turn to it because we have gone through the foundation making:
How do I mix things up at my next gathering?
If Internet-advice sites are a guide, the hunger for answers to this
question is widespread. From SheKnows.com: “Ways to Spice Up Your
Next Dinner Party.” From the online-invitation company Evite: “5 Ways to
Spice Up Your Office Party.” From Wisdump: “Holding a Conference?
Spice It Up with These Geeky Ideas.” From the Catholic Youth Ministry
Hub: “Twelve Ways to Spice Up Your Next Youth Group Breakfast.”
Some of the tips you find on such sites work; some don’t. But this genre
of advice misses a larger point, which is that many of our bland gatherings
cannot be saved by one-off interventions and tricks that are disconnected
from the context of the gathering. A gathering’s blandness is a symptom of
a disease. We must treat the disease. And what is the disease? That the
gathering makes no effort to do what the best gatherings do: transport us to
a temporary alternative world.

So I will leave the micro-tips and micro-tricks of spicing things up to the
Internet. In this chapter we will delve into a way of seasoning your
gathering more deeply: designing it as a world that will exist only once.
THE RISE OF RULES
I began noticing the invitations a few years ago—invitations I personally
received and ones people showed me. In some ways, they were
conventional, asking people to a dinner, a conference, or a meeting. But
they contained an unfamiliar, even jarring ingredient: rules for the
gathering.
There was the group that called itself, with no apparent humility, the
Influencer Salon. It gathers twelve strangers every month to cook and eat
together. The invitation contained these rules: “Conversation: We ask that
guests do not discuss their careers or give their last names until after the
presentation portion of the evening”; “Photography: Photos are only
allowed during the presentation portion”; and “Attendance: People who
confirm and do not attend are unlikely to be invited again.” (The
presentation, it turned out, was the serving of the dinner.)
There was a gathering called the House of Genius, which started as an
experiment in Boulder, Colorado, bringing together a group of
entrepreneurs and using their collective brainpower to solve one of their
problems. It came with its own set of “House Rules,” including “FIRST
NAMES ONLY: Personal information—last names, professions, etc.—are
saved for last. In the interest of maintaining pure collaboration, use first
names only until The Reveal”; and “COLLABORATE
CONSTRUCTIVELY: Genius is about creative, actionable ideas for a
greater good. Criticism can be appropriate, but please keep it constructive.
If you like something that has already been said, feel free to ‘+1’ the
comment.”
There was a so-called Jeffersonian Dinner, the invitation to which
warned that “you cannot talk to the person next to you, you can only talk to
the entire table.”
There was a destination birthday party in New Orleans, whose invitation
came with its own rather charming set of rules: “Limit your time in bed,”

“Don’t stray from the herd, be a strong follower,” “Take tremendous photos
but post nothing,” “Commit to a conversation with a local,” “Make up more
rules as we go,” and “Don’t miss the flight home.”
There was a wedding invitation that said, “We invite you to be Fully
Present with us at our UNPLUGGED WEDDING. Kindly turn off your
phones and cameras.”
There was even a Christmas party invitation that issued a rule about
RSVPing: “We don’t care if you come or go, but you must RSVP. If you
don’t RSVP, you won’t be invited next year.”
At times, these rules struck me as unreasonably demanding. Who are
you to tell me who to talk to, which of my names I can reveal, what I can
talk about, whether I seek alone time or not, whether I check my texts or
not, whether I update my Instagram feed or not? These rules could seem
like the stuffy old etiquette that ruled many older gatherings, but on
steroids. What’s nice about etiquette is no one clogs up your inbox about it.
No one tells you what it is in advance. No one forces you to practice it. You
just may not get invited back if you mess it up. Here was something
different: people dictating the details of their guests’ conduct up front and
plainly, leaving nothing to the imagination or social cues.
It took me time to understand that what these gatherings signified was
not a doubling down on etiquette but a rebellion against it. In the
explicitness and oftentimes the whimsy of these rules was a hint of what
they were really about: replacing the passive-aggressive, exclusionary,
glacially conservative commandments of etiquette with something more
experimental and democratic.
RANDOM KNOWLEDGE OF HOW OLD RICH
PEOPLE WANT YOU TO BEHAVE
In sixth grade, I begged my parents to sign me up for Junior Cotillion.
All my friends in northern Virginia were doing it, and I was not going to be
left out, even if I didn’t know what a “cotillion” was. My parents—since I
was an only child and was raised in my early years outside the United
States—were keen on sending me to things where I would have company,

especially if they seemed very American. Thus they signed me up for what
amounted to Southern charm school lite.
The National League of Junior Cotillions traces its origins back to the
town of Lincolnton, North Carolina, and the year 1979, when a woman
named Anne Colvin Winters began teaching etiquette. Winters was a former
pageant winner and debutante in her hometown of Gastonia, North
Carolina, who would go on to be a statewide organizer for Ronald Reagan’s
presidential campaigns, focusing on colleges and universities. The little
classes she began in Lincolnton eventually grew into a national
organization, with three hundred chapters in more than thirty states. Junior
Cotillion offered students “a three year curriculum designed to give young
people instruction and practice in the courtesies that make life more
pleasant for them and those around them.”
Among the skills that Junior Cotillion taught were proper telephone
courtesy, acknowledgment of gifts, introductions, receiving lines,
participating in group settings, polite conversation, paying and receiving
compliments, sports etiquette, first impressions, dress code for all
occasions, manners in the home and in public places, table manners, formal
place settings, styles of dining (including American, Asian, and
Continental), skills involved in being a guest, hostess, or host, and many
other areas of social behavior.
Once a month, I put on stockings, a pleated navy polyester skirt, a white
turtleneck that I tucked into that skirt, and my favorite floral vest, and I was
driven to a local country club to learn how to make life more pleasant for
those around me. The teacher, a South African woman, would roll out a
table with a white tablecloth and show us proper table settings, down to the
precise placement of a wineglass. She explained the correct way to send a
thank-you note (promptly and by including a specific detail of
appreciation), what to do when you drop a fork at a restaurant (never pick it
up), and the steps of the foxtrot. I remember most classes ending with a
formal dance lesson. (I was terrified of this part because it required pairing
up with a boy to learn the steps, and I suffered from what my friends called
“sweaty-hand syndrome.”)
Cotillion was enjoyable, if not life changing. I enjoyed hanging out and
giggling through much of it with my friends. I saw the inside of a country
club for the first time. And I liked the graduation ceremony, because we got
to have a dance party at the local Clyde’s restaurant. But the lessons

imparted to us didn’t feel especially useful. I filed the teachings of Junior
Cotillion into the deep recesses of my brain as Random Knowledge of How
Old Rich People Want You to Behave.
There is no doubt that etiquette has a certain value. I’m the one who
lobbied my parents to send me to Junior Cotillion, after all. Within a certain
social milieu or professional class, it is helpful to have a common set of
norms and behaviors. Sharing this common code allows people to
coordinate more easily, to avoid embarrassing one another, and to minimize
the social risk of situations.
These positive features of etiquette work particularly well in stable,
closed, homogeneous groups. When like gathers with like, etiquette often
does its work so well that no one notices its presence. In ancient Greece,
when you were invited to a symposium, you knew there would be a chair
for you, probably in a circle, perhaps in the host’s bedroom, and that you
had better prepare your liver and your larynx. If you were invited to a
neighbor’s home in Waterloo, Iowa, in the 1950s, you would know that
after eating in the dining room, the group might wander over to the piano to
sing songs together, many of which you, like everyone else, had learned in
Sunday school. In Stockholm today, when you’re invited to a crayfish party
in August, you know that you might need to call back to mind the lyrics of
the snapvisor and that you should be ready to down a shot of schnapps. And
in Argentina, when families gather for a Sunday-afternoon barbecue, no one
makes plans for the rest of the day. That would be silly. Because they know,
after they eat platter after platter of meat, they will sit and talk, and then sit
and talk some more—sobremesa, or “over the table,” as it is called. Each of
these situations is lubricated by etiquette. A group of like-minded, similarly
raised people gather enjoyably, over and over, by following an unspoken
and long-standing code of being.
The problem is that more and more of us do not live in closed circles of
like-minded, similarly raised people. Think of the last few gatherings you
attended—a work meeting, a class, a trade show. Chances are, you sat next
to and talked with people from places other than where you’re from, people
with different cultural norms, people of different races and religions and
histories. And chances are, therefore, that you sat next to people who do
practice etiquette—but etiquette different from yours, and perhaps even in
conflict with it on certain points. When my Argentine friends used to show
up to dinner parties in New York an hour late, they were confused as to why

their friends were livid. They were experiencing a clash not of civilizations
but of etiquettes. When Jewish and Christian in-laws come together for the
first time over Thanksgiving, and one side opens with the Lord’s Prayer, as
they always have, and the other family sits quietly feeling isolated, they,
too, are experiencing a clash of etiquettes, not to mention belief systems. In
the world we are becoming, there will be even more such clashes.
ETIQUETTE VS. POP-UP RULES
The rise of pop-up rules can be better understood against this backdrop.
It is no accident that rules-based gatherings are emerging as modern life
does away with monocultures and closed circles of the similar. Pop-up rules
are perhaps the new etiquette, more suited to modern realities. If implicit
etiquette, absorbed from birth, was useful for gatherings of closed tribes,
whether Boston Brahmins or Tamil ones, explicit pop-up rules are better for
gathering across difference. Rules-based gatherings, controlling as they
might seem, are actually bringing new freedom and openness to our
gatherings. To grasp why, we have to look into the differences between pop-
up rules and etiquette.
The cotillion class I took is part of a long tradition of etiquette that goes
back hundreds of years. In 1750, the fourth Earl of Chesterfield wrote a
letter to his illegitimate son, Philip Stanhope, laying out advice that would
come to be regarded as one of the founding texts of modern etiquette. “You
have acquired knowledge,” he wrote, “which is the Principium et Fons; but
you have now a variety of lesser things to attend to, which collectively
make one great and important object. You easily guess that I mean the
Graces, the air, address, politeness.” Among these “Graces” was the ability
“to carve, eat, and drink genteelly, and with ease.” One should avoid
“awkward attitudes, and illiberal, ill-bred, and disgusting habits; such as
scratching yourself, putting your fingers in your mouth, nose, and ears.”
On the road from eighteenth-century etiquette to Junior Cotillion were
many stops: the teachings of Emily Post, Robert’s Rules of Order for
business conduct, and various other sources of guidance on how not to mess
up in polite society. Yet when I read the letters of the Earl of Chesterfield,

what strikes me is how a few basic features of the etiquette approach to life
were baked in from the start.
One of these is fixedness. Whether in the earl’s instructions to his son or
in the curriculum I absorbed at Junior Cotillion, there is a strong sense of
permanence. These aren’t the guidelines for this event or this month or this
year; these are the enduring right ways to be. To practice these ways was to
uphold a tradition. And because these codes wouldn’t change, the
assumption was that you needed to learn them early and on your own time,
so that you would be ready to deploy them in society. “We truly believe
manners will never go out of style and the skills we help children develop
are the skills of a lifetime,” the National League of Junior Cotillions
declares.
The etiquette approach to life is also imperious. It is the opposite of
humble. It shows minimal interest in how different cultures or regions do
things. It upholds a gold standard of behavior as the only acceptable one for
people who wish to be seen as refined. It is not interested in variety or
diversity, or the idea of different strokes for different folks. At Junior
Cotillion, we didn’t learn the dances of Compton, Spanish Harlem, or
Appalachia. We learned the foxtrot. We acquired its idea of the universal
access code for appearing polite.
A third feature of the etiquette approach is exclusion. The value system
behind etiquette is aristocratic. It is designed to help you stand out from the
mob. The idea is to scale the social ladder, not collapse it. If everyone knew
the foxtrot and proper wine-glass placement, going to Junior Cotillion
would no longer help students transcend the herd and be “among the most
successful in their graduating classes,” as its website promises.
If the standards of etiquette are fixed, imperious, and exclusionary, pop-
up rules have the power to flip these traits on their head, creating the
possibility of more experimental, humble, and democratic—and satisfying!
—gatherings.
If etiquette is about sustaining unchanging norms, pop-up rules are about
trying stuff out. The etiquette of not bringing up politics or religion at
dinner applies, in the minds of those who believe in it, to all dinners, not
just their own, and not just ones during an election year. But the rule of not
saying your last name at a salon is a lark that expires as soon as the last
guest has gone. In an etiquette-based gathering, the ways of behaving flow
from your identity and define who you are. In a rules-based gathering, the

behaviors are temporary. Whereas etiquette fostered a kind of repression,
gathering with rules can allow for boldness and experimentation. Rules can
create an imaginary, transient world that is actually more playful than your
everyday gathering. That is because everyone realizes that the rules are
temporary and is, therefore, willing to obey them.
If etiquette is about the One Right Way, pop-up rules make no such
claims. They are free of the ethnocentric, classist pretensions of etiquette,
because the rules they enforce are made-up. Their impermanence is a sign
of their humility. No one is claiming that the withholding of last names is
the mark of a cultured person. They are just saying that on this day, at this
time, with these people, for this purpose, do not say your last name, and let
us see what happens.
And if etiquette is about keeping people out of certain gatherings and
social circles, pop-up rules can actually democratize who gets to gather.
What could be less democratic than etiquette, which must be internalized
for years before showing up at an event? A rule requires no advance
preparation. Thus someone who has just arrived in a country and is
unfamiliar with its culture, but is able to read an email, can fully, without
embarrassment, partake in a rules-based gathering—but would struggle at a
gathering full of etiquette landmines. It is not difficult as an outsider to
comply with the rules of a Jeffersonian Dinner or a House of Genius event
or one of the trendy new “silent dinners.” But grasping whether a dinner
party in Hamburg is the kind at which you should say “gesundheit” after a
sneeze or rather shouldn’t—that takes years of immersing in German social
life, of learning codes and cues. If implicit etiquette serves closed circles
that assume commonality, explicit rules serve open circles that assume
difference. The explicitness levels the playing field for outsiders.
Etiquette allows people to gather because they are the same. Pop-up
rules allow people to gather because they are different—yet open to having
the same experience. In my observation, many of the people best able to
gather across tribal lines these days are those willing to play with pop-up
rules. When they do, they often end up creating that temporary alternative
world I described earlier. By drafting a kind of one-time-only constitution
for a gathering, a host can give rise to a fleeting kingdom that pulls people
in, tries something new, and, yes, spices things up.
Let’s now zoom in on one such gathering and see how it works—the
Dîner en Blanc.

A KALEIDOSCOPE OF WHITE
Dîner en Blanc is a magical example of what a gathering can achieve
when it is governed by explicit rules rather than hidden etiquette. It is a
global dinner-party series that has hosted events all over the world, from
Kingston to Singapore, Kigali to Bucharest. A dinner in a single city on a
single night may have as many as fifteen thousand guests. An event occurs
just once a year in any given city, but there have now been dinners in
seventy cities on six continents. The dinners bring together people of all
backgrounds, races, languages, and sexual orientations. People don’t need
to share a common language; they can come with whatever dietary
restrictions they have.
What became a global phenomenon started as a personal invitation. In
1988, François Pasquier was returning to his native France with his family
after two years living in French Polynesia. He invited a large group of
friends to join him for dinner at his home to celebrate his homecoming.
Then, realizing there wouldn’t be enough space, he told them instead to
meet at the Parc de Bagatelle, one of Paris’s four botanical gardens. He
asked each guest to bring a friend and to wear white to make it easier to
find one another in the public gardens. The evening turned out to be
memorable and electric and they decided to repeat it the following year, and
again the following. Each year, there were many of the usual suspects, plus
a growing number of newcomers. It expanded and expanded, all through
word of mouth, each year more spectacular than the last. Once it outgrew
the Parc de Bagatelle, they began hosting it in even more iconic venues in
Paris—the Pont des Arts, the Palais-Royal, and the Trocadéro. The
organizers tried to keep a certain continuity to the dinners by requiring that
newcomers be invited by someone who had attended the previous year.
Still, over time, the annual Parisian dinner has grown to more than fifteen
thousand guests. And it began to spread around the world, from continent to
continent.
And the not-so-secret secret of its spread is the invention of a rule-based
format that allows the dinners to gather people who share very little in
common.
On the appointed evening, thousands of locals dress elegantly in white
from head to toe, with a dash of the spectacular—perhaps a boa, a
fascinator, a top hat, a cane, angel wings, or white gloves. They arrive in

pairs at one of a number of designated locations throughout the city. They
are carrying picnic baskets full of champagne, elegant home-cooked food,
glassware, white tablecloths, white flowers, and their own fold-up tables
and chairs. They do not know ahead of time where this massive flash mob
of a dinner party will take place. But they are sure it will be good.
The guests are escorted, typically in groups of fifty, from their meeting
points to a surprise venue in the city, along with thousands of others. Once
at the venue, they set about building a glimmering but temporary ant colony
of white. They unfold their white tables, their white portable chairs, their
white tablecloths. They array their tables in long rows, and the women sit
on one side of each row all the way down, the men on the other. Each pair
lays its own table with things brought from outside: glassware, porcelain,
candles, fresh flowers, vases, napkin holders, and whatever else might add
to the beauty of the evening. There is not a speck of paper or plastic to be
seen.
There is no public announcement to begin, no MC guiding the night (in
fact, it is explicitly forbidden). Rather, to signal the beginning of the
evening, guests, reading one another’s cues, grab their white dinner napkins
and wave them in the air. It is time to eat. For ninety minutes, as the sun
sets, this gigantic tribe feasts on three-course homemade meals. The food,
like the tables and candles and everything else, is brought by the guests, and
the hosts strongly encourage it to be homemade. (In recent years in certain
cities, there has also been an option to purchase food from a vendor on-
site.) The wine is white or rosé or champagne; there are few, if any, beer
cans in sight. Dessert time comes—guests are encouraged to make
something special: chocolate-covered strawberries, say, or individually
wrapped macarons. During dinner, everyone remains seated; no one stands
or wanders around. Marriage proposals have been known to happen at this
hour.
People all over the world have described attending Dîner en Blanc as the
best night of their year. One elderly guest in New York described it in this
way: “Over the past three and a half years, I’ve been dealing with physical
illness and challenges, and despite that, I’ve made sure that I attend the
Dîner en Blanc every year, even if my doctors recommend that I didn’t
come, because I find it spiritually and emotionally and physically such a
rejuvenating thing.” He continued, “You really can’t describe the emotions

and the feelings that are involved unless you’re here and feel them
yourself.”
As dusk yields to the summer night, you might notice every table
lighting sparklers, signaling the evening’s next transition. Guests stand up,
find other friends, hug, toast, and begin to dance. The entertainment, always
a surprise, begins. It might be an electronic violin, as at a dinner in New
York; or choreographed dancers with paper parasols, as in Tokyo; or drums
and guitar, as in Port-au-Prince, Haiti. The mood changes as the pulse of
this coordinated tribe grows stronger. At midnight, a trumpet sounds. The
guests wrap up their tables, pack their items, and collectively leave. Four
hours after everyone sat down to eat, there’s no trace of the evening.
A GAMBLE ON RULES
Why has Dîner en Blanc spread so well? Perhaps because of its intuition
that etiquette would be inadequate to the task of gathering so many different
kinds of people. Dîner en Blanc instead bet on rules—rules that would one
day help a woman named Kumi Ishihara import the magic to Japan.
Thousands of miles from the Parc de Bagatelle, and many years after
that original gathering, Ishihara one day saw a YouTube video of a flash
mob dinner in New York. Born in the Japanese seaside town of Kamakura,
Ishihara had moved with her family at age fourteen to Düsseldorf,
Germany, where she attended a Japanese school and acquired a sense of
herself as a nomad. After stints in Singapore and London, she returned to
Japan in her late twenties and built a motley livelihood as a yoga instructor,
creative consultant, and translator. When she saw this video of thousands of
people in white, it grabbed her. “I was so amazed to watch this crowd of
white gathering,” she told me. She loved that it was a global phenomenon,
connecting disparate people through the same experience. She knew she
had to bring Dîner en Blanc to Japan.
She first needed to convince the French organizers to grant her a coveted
Dîner en Blanc license. To maintain the dinner’s integrity, the French
organizers have developed a system of granting official licenses to
organizers all over the world to host an official Dîner en Blanc. She
convinced two Japanese friends who had more experience organizing large

events to join her in applying and interviewing, and after two video
conferences they won the license.
Ishihara now had to figure out how to bring this very public European
dinner to a very private Japanese context. She and her fellow organizers
needed Japanese authorities to give them space on public grounds for an
admittedly strange-sounding event. They had to generate interest in the
dinner among hundreds of people, most of whom had not heard about it
before. Perhaps most difficult of all, they had to persuade these strangers to
follow a set of intricate, unfamiliar protocols.
As an organizer, Ishihara was required to follow and enforce an
extensive list of strict rules that she received from the organizers. She
shared with me the following summary of them:
If you receive an invitation, you need to bring one guest with you.
The rows of tables have a male side and a female side.
Wear white, including socks, shoes, headpieces.
Dress formally and outrageously, but in good taste.
Bring wine, champagne, or mineral water. No beer, spirits, or soft
drinks.
The square table must be between 28–32 inches by 28–32 inches
and covered with a white tablecloth.
No plastic, no paper. Only glassware and fine china.
If you accept, attendance is mandatory. Rain or shine.
Food must be “quality,” ideally homemade; no fast food.
There is no MC to the evening. Everything happens through group
cues.
No standing during the eating period. This is a formal dinner.
Clean up behind you, with the trash bag you brought. Don’t leave
a trace.
Organizers may host Dîner en Blanc only once a year.
Selling the dinner to Japanese people was going to be tough. Japan,
Ishihara told me, doesn’t have a culture of dining with strangers. While
dressing in costume is common in Japan, white shoes are almost impossible
to find. Tables with the exact right measurements would need to be ordered
months in advance. People aren’t used to registering for events through the

Internet, or to schlepping and working so much to attend a party. It is
difficult enough to get people to commit to come to your event, Ishihara
said; people aren’t used to paying for something they’ve never seen before.
This was Ishihara’s challenge: to get thousands of Japanese strangers to not
only follow these rules but also be excited by them.
For months, she wrote daily Facebook posts on the Japanese Dîner en
Blanc page, to “get them in the mood,” she said. She summarized for me in
English the themes of her Facebook messages. “The story is not just about
the day,” Ishihara said. “It’s over the course of the month at least, buying
the candle stand that you like, the skirt that you like, so you’re building
momentum and excitement.” She focused on different elements over the
course of a few months. One day she wrote about the Europeanness of the
dinner: “It’s like a banquet. It’s very formal. You really have to dress up. At
a banquet, you would never dream of having it on paper plates!” She
explained to guests that the dinner was demanding on purpose: “This is a
heavy-duty party. It’s not just an easy picnic.” Above all, she employed the
Passover Principle that I wrote about in chapter 1, conveying that this was a
special invitation for a special night, that it would happen no more than
once a year, and that it was the inaugural Dîner en Blanc in Japan. “We are
choosing this secret place, which no one else in Japan or anyone else has
ever dined at,” she said, recalling her post. “It will likely be the only time in
your life you will dine there.”
Some in Tokyo might have recoiled at certain rules, just as people
around the world have. In Singapore, a debate arose about whether
Singaporean food was “formal” enough, generating a firestorm of outrage
about their “ancient colonial master mindset.” In Boston, a blogger wrote,
“Um, so if I’m part of a same-sex couple, romantic or platonic, I can’t sit
with my guest? Because it will mess up the symmetry?” In Washington,
D.C.: “No event has ever made me want to plan a paintball rampage like
this one.” In New Orleans: “This whole thing makes me feel like putting on
an old Saints jersey and licking roast beef po-boy gravy off my forearm
while doing the Cupid Shuffle.” Organizers have been accused of being
“snobbish,” and their event “too expensive” (it varies by city but is roughly
thirty-five to fifty dollars per person to register) and simply too much work
for the guests. In Vancouver, two artists even staged an alternative “ad hoc,
barely-even-organized, family-friendly” Ce Soir Noir to which 1,500 people
turned out. And yet the dinner continues to spread from city to city, year

after year, with longer and longer waiting lists. The waiting list in Tokyo
was 11,000 people. The waiting list in Philadelphia has been as high as
26,000 people.
Having attended the one in New York as a fly on the wall, I can tell you
the crowd was more diverse in every way than that at most New York
parties I have attended—and more diverse than the clientele of most New
York restaurants of comparable elegance. As a cohost of the New York
event told Time Out magazine, “The beautiful thing about this event is that
it’s so diverse. The community here is from every background and every
part of New York. It’s truly a reflection of the city that we’re in. It’s brilliant
to be a part of something that brings so many different people together, and
to have everyone celebrate as one. You can put everything else aside, but at
the end of the night, we’re all wearing white.”
Shane Harris, a political reporter who wrote about the Dîner en Blanc in
Washington, D.C., made a similar observation. Harris touted the event as
being “snobbery-free”—a rarity in a self-important city known for “its rigid
social calendar and order.” He wrote:
We may have been all dressed in white. But we were, as a lot, mostly
African-American, followed by white, with a ribbon of Asian and
Latino throughout. We were old. We were young. We were gay. We
were straight.
I couldn’t tell who was rich and poor. A woman in a stunning silk
gown could have been an intern as easily as a partner in a law firm.
What these people were not was the type I’m used to suffering at
so many social occasions. No one was looking over their neighbor’s
shoulder to see who they really should be talking to. No one asked
what I did for a living. It was a delightfully douche-free affair.
In the elegant Washington soirées to which Harris seemed more
accustomed, it’s usually the clothes that come in all colors and the people
who are overwhelmingly white. At Dîner en Blanc, it was the clothes that
were white and the people who were of every color. I don’t believe it’s a
coincidence. When the social code is spelled out, when it is turned into a
one-night-only game, you don’t have to know certain unsaid things, you
don’t have to have been raised in a certain way, you don’t have to be

steeped in a certain culture, you don’t have to have parsed decades’ worth
of social cues. You just need to be told tonight’s rules. This is the bargain
that the rules-based gatherer offers: if you accept a greater rigidity in the
setup of the event, the gatherer will offer you a different and much richer
freedom—to gather with people of all kinds, in spite of your own gathering
traditions.
On Ishihara’s big night in Tokyo, 1,600 white-clad partiers showed up at
the appointed hour, at the appointed place. Ishihara described what she felt
during the waving of the handkerchiefs that opened the dinner: “We
conquered this place.” The people all around her were total strangers to
most others in the gathering. But something about the scene and the strange,
binding, liberating rules created a beauty and a sense of awe that brought
people together, Ishihara said: “Your heart is already open, so you can be
friends with anybody.”
At the end of the party, a trumpet was blown to notify the guests that it
was over. “Do you remember Cinderella?” Ishihara asked. “Cinderella
would know at twelve midnight that she has to go. And here, too, people
would automatically know that this midnight summer is over.” She said that
she felt herself asking, “Is it a dream or reality?” Such is the power of
gathering openly and colorfully with rules. You create another world. And
then it expires, and you begin all over again.
RULES VS. PHONES
Etiquette, as we’ve seen, is a problematic glue in modern society,
because it makes it harder, rather than easier, to gather across differences.
Nor is that its only drawback. Etiquette is also a hopelessly porous shield
against the most powerful force of our age: addictive technology.
Anyone who gathers nowadays must, like it or not, cope with the reality
that people are often elsewhere, thanks to their technological devices.
Perpetual distraction is a curse of modern life and of modern convening in
particular. People are often too busy to gather at all. Scheduling gatherings
can be a nightmare. Coordinating people can be a pain. And when, against
all odds, we do come together, our minds are in a thousand places.

How do you get people to be present at your gathering? How do you get
them not only out from behind their screens but also not thinking about
those screens? If people check their phones an average of 150 times a day,
as some studies have shown, how do you ensure 50 of those check-ins
aren’t at your event? You may have everyone in one room, but how do you
get people to be here?
For too long, in too many settings, our response to these questions has
depended too heavily on manners, on unspoken norms—on etiquette. We
have hoped that not checking your phone during dinner will become like
not double-dipping a chip—something people know not to do without being
told. (Clearly, neither norm has succeeded.) But etiquette is not succeeding
against technology in an age of distraction. And if etiquette fails with large,
plural groups because it is internalized and implicit, it fails against
technology for an even simpler reason. An army of some of the smartest
people alive are working feverishly to ensure that etiquette stands no chance
against our addictive new technologies.
In 2011, Google acquired a small company called Apture, along with it
its CEO, a man named Tristan Harris. He ended up working on the team
that designed Gmail’s inbox app and realized what he would later publicly
say: “Never before in history have the decisions of a handful of designers
(mostly men, white, living in SF, aged 25–35) working at 3 companies”—
Google, Apple, and Facebook—“had so much impact on how millions of
people around the world spend their attention . . . We should feel an
enormous responsibility to get this right.” Harris eventually published this
sentiment in a 144-slide presentation titled “A Call to Minimize Distraction
& Respect Users’ Attention,” directed to his Google colleagues. It is an
impassioned plea to abandon the hobbyhorse of personal responsibility and
manners—of etiquette—as the proper response to distraction. Making it an
individual’s responsibility not to be distracted, Harris told The Atlantic, is
“not acknowledging that there’s a thousand people on the other side of the
screen whose job is to break down whatever responsibility I can maintain.”
Google appointed him to be its in-house “philosopher.” His mission was to
reflect on how technology was affecting human societies.
If etiquette doesn’t stand a chance against the programmers of Silicon
Valley, why would rules? Because rules are explicit and become an
experimental game. There is a certain kind of fun in trying something for a
bounded moment. The kind of restriction that might feel oppressive if

permanent can seem compelling and intriguing when it applies sometimes,
as part of a conscious effort to create that temporary alternative world.
“I AM HERE” DAYS
My husband and I once created an event of this kind, but inadvertently.
We were just about to move to New York and eager to explore our new
home. We wanted to get ourselves into a habit of exploring continuously;
we didn’t want to get stuck in the rut of the same few neighborhoods.
Somewhere in our conversations, we agreed to set aside a full day every
now and then for exploring a single unfamiliar neighborhood.
Soon enough, it was time for our first such day. We chose Harlem. We
mentioned it to our friend Nora Abousteit, that paragon of generous
authority. Without being invited, she announced, “I will come.” What began
as a newlyweds’ romantic plan was now a social occasion—a gathering.
Abousteit then said she was bringing a friend along (yes, she broke her own
rule). Not knowing what we were doing, we agreed. And thus “I Am Here”
days were born.
We had a friend who was a member of the Abyssinian Baptist Church,
led by the Reverend Dr. Calvin O. Butts III. The church receives thousands
of visitors every year, in part because of its famous gospel choir. However,
because we were guests of a member, we were able to sit downstairs in the
main pews, not upstairs with the outsiders. Before launching into his
sermon, Reverend Butts surprised us by not only naming us but also reading
our résumés aloud to the church. Everyone started clapping as we blushed.
We were welcomed and greeted by dozens of members.
High on the feeling of that place, we went to have lunch at a nearby
diner. At the diner, we talked about our different experiences of New York
and about the manic pace of the city. Having now spent a few hours
together, we started to share our fears and anxieties about living there,
understanding the social codes, figuring out if we could afford to stay.
Without much forethought, we then walked forty blocks south. What we
were doing had begun to feel a bit like an investigation of our city, and
someone suggested that we should see not only big institutions and

restaurants but also private homes. That was where the action was. But how
would we see a private home?
Suddenly, Abousteit remembered that she had a friend who lived nearby.
On a whim, she texted him to ask him if we could stop by to say hello. To
our surprise, he invited us for tea, and we got to see the inside of a beautiful
home. We were so tickled by our luck that we decided to keep going, this
time walking north to the Museum of the City of New York. There we
learned all about the making of New York City—how its lands were
leveled, how the farms were paved over, how skyscrapers could be built
only in certain places. On our way out, we heard loud beats from a
neighboring building and discovered a huge, underground dance party at
four on a Sunday afternoon. We grabbed a beer and started dancing. An
hour later, sweaty, we broke away and entered Central Park. We realized
that we felt relaxed, peaceful, and full of energy, despite having walked so
much. And we had barely checked our phones. At 7 p.m., we called it a day.
We went home full of the people we had met, the blocks we had walked, the
conversations we had had. Only three weeks after moving to a new city, we
thought: Maybe we can find our people here. Maybe we can call this city
home.
What began as a vague idea between the two of us turned into one of the
most meaningful gathering rituals of our early days in New York. First there
were the four of us, and then six on another day, and then eight or ten on
another. In the beginning, there weren’t any rules; we just stuck together the
whole time. We began to gather on those Saturdays or Sundays in a way
that felt different from how we usually spent time with people. We would
choose a neighborhood and rotate “curation” of the day—basically, the role
of deciding what to do. At first, it was relatively ad hoc, and the only real
rule was that you had to come on time and stay the whole time. I didn’t
originally intend to have any rules. They evolved organically.
Almost by accident, my husband and I fell upon a gathering format that
created some magic almost every time we used it. The “I Am Here” days
came to fruition out of an intentional idea, but their structure developed
naturally. Our constraints were natural ones: Choose an area that can be
covered by foot; invite a group small enough to be able to sit together at a
single table for meals; take into account the weather. We found that the days
worked better when one person took on the role of curator and did some
research ahead of time, to create a specific and enjoyable experience for

everyone else—whether or not they knew anything about the neighborhood.
We also found that the days worked best when everyone else agreed to
submit to the curator’s generous authority.
Our original motivation had to do with exploration and discovery more
than presence. But as the days morphed from a two-person concept into a
regular group expedition, and as more people became interested in
attending them, including people we didn’t know, I was forced to codify the
practices that had emerged. People needed to know what they were signing
up for. So I took what had basically been implicit, rendered it explicit, and
sent these rules out to newcomers:
If you’re going to join an “I Am Here” day, be there from start to
finish (all 10–12 hours).
Turn off technology (unless it directly relates to the day).
Agree to be present and engaged in the group and what’s going on.
One conversation at meals.
Be game for anything.
Among these rules, it became clear that the two most important ones
were spending a full day together and no technology. And they were
powerful because they forced a degree of presence rare in New York and
the tech-addled modern world. People had to come on time, stay the entire
time—no coming and going. When they knew that was the deal, they
became more relaxed. They couldn’t micro-coordinate. They were giving
up the option of finding a better option. They were just here. And because
we were all here, we enjoyed one another’s company to the fullest. These
rules allowed busy, stressed-out, perpetually distracted people to come
together and simplify. “I Am Here” days worked because the rules created a
feeling that it was “enough” simply to be there, because when you were
“here,” you were in another world.
We tend to associate rules with formality and stiffness, but in our “I Am
Here” days we found that rules created intimacy. Each of us on his or her
own was no match for the coding geniuses at Google and Facebook and
Snapchat. But once presence was enshrined as a rule, a one-day-only
attempt—temporary, humble, inclusive—overcame the power of the
machines in our pockets and the churning of our brains.

We discovered from these experiments that spending twelve hours
together as a group is fundamentally different from spending four hours
together on three separate occasions. The longer you’re together, the more
reality sets in. You can only chitchat for so long. People (including you) get
tired and cranky; walls start to come down. By the time late afternoon
arrives, people begin sharing stories of their pasts, of their struggles with
money, parents, religion—topics that don’t always come up easily. And it
was these conversations that truly mattered and made me feel less alone. I
realized that there were others in the city who had left the homes they knew
in pursuit of adventure but who, like me, treasured their families. That there
were others who experienced setbacks in their work and wanted to talk
about them but who, like me, didn’t always want to be discussing work.
That there were others who worried about money but who, like me, didn’t
want it to keep them from taking risks. And, most simply, that there were
“busy New Yorkers” who were not only willing but also hungry to slow
down and savor time with friends and even strangers.
The rules to be present worked because they weren’t imperious. They
were just the formula for these occasional days. And when we followed
these rules, they changed our behavior, and they changed the way people
saw and interacted with us. As we walked around neighborhoods, a present
band of people, locals sitting on their stoops were curious about this strange
nomadic tribe that seemed to operate on a different set of rules from
everyone else’s. We found ourselves sitting down with strangers and
chatting with the owners of neighborhood bars. We once hung out with a
local TV crew waiting for a story to air. We were invited to share cans of
sardines in a garage in Red Hook. We spent time debating homosexuality
with ultra-Orthodox Jews in a synagogue, and we got our fortunes read in
one of the last working Daoist temples in Chinatown. On one magical night
on Roosevelt Island—situated in the East River between Manhattan and
Queens—we were invited upstairs to a bar owner’s apartment to see the
plant that a Chinese grandmother gave her New York–based grandson, the
Epiphyllum oxypetalum, which blooms one night a year. (It was not the
night we were there.) As we sat and sipped wine overlooking the
Williamsburg Bridge, the bar owner pulled out his family album and shared
photos of his grandmother. By lingering and listening, we witnessed a
moment of beauty.

Why did we feel so freed by imposing these rules on ourselves? My
friend Baratunde Thurston, a comedian and veteran of several “I Am Here”
days, answers the question this way:
It’s rare for groups of people to do things together for a sustained
amount of time. We all carry with us the technical capacity to be
anywhere, to check out of the present time or space. That means we
always could be doing anything. So the active choice to do ONE
thing and to do it with a fixed set of people is significant. I
sometimes found myself feeling antsy with the rules. I wanted to text
someone or look up information or just flip through Instagram
because Instagram trained me to treat unfilled time as an opportunity
to browse Instagram.
What “I Am Here” day offered was a different way to fill that
time. Because of the rules, I could go deeper into the experience. I
could observe something around me my phone would have caused
me to miss. I could interact with a person next to me instead of
thousands of miles away. And with the knowledge that I would
spend an entire day with this one group, I could let go of the low-
level anxiety caused by using every moment to anticipate the next. It
didn’t matter what else was going on. It didn’t concern me where I
had to be next. Because I decided to be HERE.
That’s the point and the magic. In a world of infinite choices, choosing
one thing is the revolutionary act. Imposing that restriction is actually
liberating.
PUSH-UPS!
A diamond may be forever, but a gathering rule is just for right now.
This is its power. It can make someone like Thurston feel liberated rather
than oppressed because it is temporary, humble, and inclusive. It creates a
world that begins when the gathering begins and ends when it ends. This
fleeting quality of gathering rules allows you, the gatherer, to be creative

with them. In setting your rules, you are not making a claim for how any
other future gathering should be. A gathering run on rules is like Vegas—
what happens there stays there. And so rules allow for an experimental
spirit in gathering, whereas etiquette is that spirit’s enemy.
At least that is what I told myself after making several senior Thai
executives do push-ups in front of their colleagues. I was running a two-day
retreat for a group of twenty consultants just outside Bangkok. In Thailand,
and particularly at this firm, there was a very strong etiquette among the
consultants that the client always comes first. Accordingly, it is understood
that they pick up the phone at all hours of the night, leave family dinners to
take calls, step out of weddings to reply to texts, and hop on planes if
needed. This etiquette had helped to make the firm extremely successful in
general. However, it was an etiquette that was threatening the success of
this particular gathering: a retreat intended to build trust internally among
the consultants. I had two eight-hour days planned, and everything designed
down to the minute. Each two-hour section of the day was intense, with the
consultants focusing on one another, having powerful and honest
conversations, saying things they had been keeping from one another. Then
the first break came. A number of consultants had scheduled calls with
clients during the breaks. Not surprisingly, after fifteen minutes, they were
finding it hard to get off the phone. We started the session again, but four of
the consultants were missing. Their tardiness, even if in the name of being a
good employee, was hurting the group and making the people who were in
the room angry. And it was breaking trust, undoing all the work we had
done in the previous two hours, because the latecomers’ peers felt
disrespected. The client-first etiquette was so strong, I began to realize, that
I would need to counter it with an explicit, temporary rule.
As the stragglers came back in, one at a time, with sheepish looks on
their faces, one of the consultants made a suggestion. It was said almost as a
joke: “Push-ups!” Everyone laughed. I took the cue and decided that this
would be our rule. The four tardy consultants, in suits and ties, heels and
wingtips, looked at me like I was crazy. The consultants who had returned
to the room on time started grinning and clapping. Before you knew it, all
four consultants were down on the floor doing ten push-ups each.
It released the tension in the room, and it also introduced a new rule: If
you’re late, you can come in, but you first have to do ten push-ups. We had
three more breaks that day, and by the third one, people were literally racing

through the hallways to make it in time. After each break, people would
shut the main room door on the dot with great ceremony. If anyone was
even a few seconds late, everyone started cheering, and the condemned got
down on the floor and gave them ten push-ups. The group collectively
improvised a new rule to overrule, temporarily, their usual etiquette. By
making it fun and harmless, if slightly embarrassing, they created a fleeting
social contract that everyone bought into. The fact that the rule was physical
and funny also added some much-needed lightness to the group.
In this case, their client-first etiquette may be good for the firm in
general, but it was bad for that specific gathering. The push-up rule helped
counterbalance that strong ethic for the alternative reality of our time
together, an interlude that needed its own pop-up etiquette. Etiquette can, as
I have said, serve a purpose: to maintain pleasantness and politeness and
good behavior. But sometimes as a particular etiquette code grows
entrenched in a culture, it crowds out the possibility of other ways of
behaving that might be more appropriate for certain moments. The
consultants’ client focus was a good etiquette for most things, but it was an
etiquette that left no space for the equally important ethic of caring for their
colleagues. A gathering rule allowed us to create that space.
Harrison Owen, an organizational consultant, found this truth in his own
way when he realized the limitations of conference etiquette. Politeness and
feigning interest in others’ work were such strong values that they crowded
out the no-less-important value of learning. Owen wasn’t a social engineer,
and he wasn’t about to rewire genteel networkers not to care about other
people and their feelings—especially people they might need someday! He
stood no chance of changing the etiquette. What he could do was
temporarily overwhelm it. So he created a temporary methodology, called
Open Space Technology, in which he embedded among other things one
specific rule that helped counterbalance an implicit norm of politeness. It
was called the Law of Two Feet, and it stipulated this: “If at any time during
our time together you find yourself in any situation where you are neither
learning nor contributing, use your two feet, go someplace else.”
By creating the rule, Owen gave rise to an experiment: What happens at
a conference when people are freed, even goaded, to leave a presentation
that is not teaching them? Do the same feelings of offense take hold? Do
presenters understand? Does it change the way people present? Owen later
wrote that the purpose of his rule was “merely to eliminate all the guilt.

After all, people are going to exercise the law of two feet, mentally if not
physically, but now they do not have to feel badly about it.” As in my
workshop in Thailand, the rule counterbalanced an etiquette that is often
helpful but, for this specific gathering, did not deserve to crowd out all
other needs.
Sometimes a rule is useful when a gatherer wants people to connect in a
way that normal social norms would discourage. For example, the Latitude
Society, a controversial secret society in San Francisco that has since
disbanded, used to design various rules at their gatherings to create a sense
of belonging. One of my favorites, as shared with me by one of their
talented “Praxis” facilitators, Anthony Rocco, was that you couldn’t pour
yourself a drink; someone had to pour it for you. This simple rule forced (in
a playful way) people to interact. The rule took something most people
wanted (a drink) and tied it to something that can be awkward initially:
approaching someone you don’t know. They knew that the old etiquette of
pouring other people’s drinks before your own had withered too much to
expect strangers to follow it at their gatherings. So they made it a rule.
The proper use of rules can help you get so much more out of a
gathering because it can help temporarily change behavior. Consider the
case of Paul Laudicina, who realized that a bad habit had formed in the
board of directors he was leading at A. T. Kearney, a global management
consulting firm. Board members were constantly asking for more
information and asking clarifying questions, and this was preventing the
kinds of conversations that help a board reach critical decisions. At one
point, when negotiations among board members were breaking down and
tempers were flaring, Laudicina realized that people were asking questions
in order to avoid making tough decisions. Curiosity was fine in general, but
it wasn’t useful given the purpose of this particular gathering. As the chair
of the board, he introduced a new rule: Board members could only ask
questions that were not asking for more information—that were building on
what information there already was. For example, “What is blocking us
from getting this done?” or “Who has a problem with this?” or “What
would it take to come to agreement on this issue?” As opposed to “Can you
give me last year’s Q4 numbers?”
Laudicina ensured that all board members had the information they
needed well ahead of the meetings and had ample time before the meetings
to ask any questions that clarified the issues. By putting information-

gathering questions off-limits, he forced his board members to have the
kind of difficult but productive conversations that led them to state their
positions more explicitly and reach decisions. As board chair, Laudicina
had the legitimacy to introduce the rule. But the brilliance of the rule was
that he changed the board’s language. And by limiting and reorienting the
language, he created a temporary alternative world in which they couldn’t
ask for more information. It forced them to create a world in which each
was adding rather than staying still or even detracting.
Laudicina didn’t need to create an entire world of rules to temporarily
shift the world of the board meeting. He was able to identify the one
behavior that he believed was stalling progress and create a temporary rule
to overturn it.

U
Five
Never Start a Funeral with Logistics
•       •       •
ntil now, we have explored how to give your gathering a purpose,
and how to start making decisions based on it. We’ve discussed
choosing guests and a location in keeping with that purpose. We’ve
talked about finding your voice as a host to keep your gathering true to that
purpose. We’ve experimented with formats and rules that may spice things
up.
At some point, though, the big day itself will arrive, and our thoughts
must turn from preparation to operation. What do you actually do with these
people?
PRIMING
Before your event starts, it has begun
Your gathering begins at the moment your guests first learn of it. This
may sound obvious, but it’s not. If it were obvious, hosts wouldn’t fail to
host the pregame for their gathering as often as they do. In my experience,
hosts often think of their event as beginning when you call the meeting to
order or take your seats at the wedding or walk into your dinner party. In
each of these cases, your guests have been thinking about and preparing for
and anticipating your gathering well in advance of that moment. They have
been experiencing your gathering from what I call the moment of discovery.
The intentional gatherer begins to host not from the formal start of the event
but from that moment of discovery.

This window of time between the discovery and the formal beginning is
an opportunity to prime your guests. It is a chance to shape their journey
into your gathering. If this chance is squandered, logistics can again overrun
the human imperative of getting the most out of your guests and offering
them the most your gathering can. Moreover, the less priming you do in this
pregame window, the more work awaits you during the gathering itself.
Because so much gathering advice comes from experts in food and
decor rather than from facilitators, that advice almost invariably focuses on
preparing things instead of preparing people. This advice makes the
pregame window about physical setup rather than human initiation, about
the gathering space and not what it holds: people.
For example, Martha Stewart has published on her website a “Party-
Planning Guide.” It contains a helpful twenty-nine-item checklist for
would-be hosts. Stewart covers what must be done weeks in advance
(“Choose the type of party you want to throw”) and what must be done in
the hours before showtime (“Set up the bar, if it is not already done”). What
struck me, though, is that only three of Stewart’s steps involve
communicating with guests, and each of these is logistical: mail or email
invitations; let guests know what to make if it’s a potluck; chase guests who
haven’t yet RSVP’d.
In this vision, people are to be corralled, not prepared. Compare this lack
of human preparation to the kind of preparation that Stewart suggests for
things: “1 Day Before: Wash and prepare salad greens and other vegetables,
and blanch vegetables for crudités (keep these wrapped in paper towels).
Refrigerate all separately, in airtight containers.” This encapsulates the
prevailing approach to gathering that I hope to change: fussing over the
crudités and hoping for the best when it comes to the human beings. We
deserve better.
One finds similar counsel from Rashelle Isip, a blogger, a consultant,
and the author of How to Plan a Great Event in 60 Days. She breaks
creating a gathering into the “10 Lists You Need to Make to Plan a Great
Party or Event.” There is the “Theme list,” the “Budget list,” the
“Decoration list,” the “Music playlist,” and so on. The tips are helpful, but
all ten focus on the logistics of things and people, not on the priming of the
guests. It’s not that these logistics don’t matter. They absolutely do. But it is
remarkable how little space there is in advice guides like this for getting
people ready.

Contrast this approach with what occurs when hosts focus during the
pregame window on preparing human beings and not crudités.
Four months after he got engaged, Felix Barrett, a prominent London-
based theater director, received a key in the mail in an envelope marked “To
be continued.” He heard nothing else for months. “It was blissful torture,”
he later said, “the whole world suddenly took on a heightened hyper-real
feeling, and everything was shrouded in mystery.”
Barrett was no stranger to mysterious experiences, but he was used to
being in the driver’s seat when they happened. The artistic director of
Punchdrunk, an immersive theater company in Britain, Barrett has shaken
up his field with his staging of daring interactive plays. In his New York
City version of Shakespeare’s Macbeth, titled Sleep No More, your
belongings are taken from you at the entrance, you are separated from your
party, and you are given a white mask to wear for the duration of the show,
a shot of liquor, and an invitation to explore five floors of an abandoned
warehouse in Chelsea.
Now the tables were turned on Barrett. After that first envelope arrived,
he waited. Eventually, another letter arrived: “Now we can begin.” A
suitcase was delivered to him at work. Inside, he later told The New York
Times, he found a tide table, map coordinates, and a small shovel. He
followed the coordinates and found himself on the banks of the River
Thames. There, he dug up a box full of photographs of words on a
computer screen. Those photographs told him that if he completed a series
of challenges, he would be welcomed into a secret society.
For weeks, he would receive bizarre prompts from odd messengers:
strangers, the words on a cat collar, letters in remote vacation spots. Each
prompt included some kind of challenge that he would have to complete
were he to enter this secret society. Barrett being Barrett, he obliged. He
found himself doing half marathons and climbing between boats on ropes.
Each individual challenge presumably took him one step closer to that
secret society.
Then suddenly one day he was blindfolded, kidnapped, and taken to an
old manor house where he was greeted by thirty men in hooded robes. They
were his best friends. He was at the bachelor party of a lifetime—his own.
Barrett’s friends understood two things well in organizing his bachelor
party. First, that a gathering starts long before guests walk through the door.
The clock of the gathering starts, so to speak, from the moment a guest

becomes aware of its existence. For Barrett, the moment he received the
key in the envelope, his journey into the gathering had begun. And from
that moment onward, his friends knew that they were hosting Barrett all the
way to the actual gathering. And that how they hosted him would shape
how he showed up to the gathering.
The 90 percent rule
A colleague in the conflict-resolution field taught me a principle I have
never forgotten: 90 percent of what makes a gathering successful is put in
place beforehand.
Randa Slim is the director of the Initiative for Track II Dialogues at the
Middle East Institute in Washington, D.C. Raised amid the traumas of the
Lebanese civil war, she emigrated to the United States to pursue a Ph.D. in
social psychology from the University of North Carolina at Charlotte. She
has since become one of the leading practitioners of track-one-and-a-half
and track-two diplomacy, in which current and former officials, alongside
influential private citizens from multiple sides of a conflict, take part in
dialogue in their personal capacities, to complement official diplomacy—
often by having more honest exchanges than are possible in official
negotiations. Over the past twenty years, Slim has run some of the most
ambitious ongoing group dialogues in the Middle East.
One such project was a dialogue series in which she brought leaders
from the United States and Europe together with leading Arab Islamic and
secular opposition leaders. The group met three times a year, for three days
at a time, for three years, to build trust and find ground for new
relationships between their respective countries. The group consisted of
twenty influential citizens with the ear of their governments, but the
freedom to speak as individuals.
Before the visas were obtained, before the agenda was built, before
anyone got on a plane, Slim spent two years flying around the Middle East,
using her own contacts, deep credibility, and fluent Arabic to identify the
right guests and prepare them for the dialogue. In some cases, she would
build trust with potential participants by sitting for hours while having tea
with their family. In other cases, she had to convince party leaders to
overturn established policies prohibiting meetings with former U.S.

officials. She traveled vast distances into disputed territories to demonstrate
goodwill, to prove that she was willing to take risks, much as she was
asking her guests to do. For two years, Slim focused on securing political
permission for the participants and preparing her guests for the dialogue.
She knew how vital it was that her interlocutors trust her. You “need from
the beginning to reinforce your interlocutors’ belief that you will never
bullshit them; you will never promise what you cannot deliver; that you will
always be straightforward with them; that there are no hidden agendas,” she
told me. This is what she is getting at when she says that 90 percent of the
gathering’s success is set in motion before the actual convening. She calls it
“the pre-dialogue dialogue phase.”
Now, most of us aren’t going to spend two years flying around the
Middle East to pregame our gathering. I am telling you about Slim not to
suggest that you copy her methods, but because there are lessons to be
learned from the philosophy underpinning her approach.
One of those lessons has to do with the scale of the ask and the scale of
the preparation. The bigger the ask—say, if you’re having people travel
long distances to attend your gathering—the more care, attention, and detail
should be put into the pregame phase. You need to attend to your guests in
this pregame window in proportion to the risk and effort you are demanding
of them.
Another lesson is that the pregame should sow in guests any special
behaviors you want to blossom right at the outset. If you are planning a
corporate brainstorming session and you’re going to be counting on your
employees’ creativity, think about how you might prime them to be bold
and imaginative from the beginning. Perhaps by sending them an article on
unleashing your wildest ideas a few days beforehand. If, for example, you
are planning a session on mentorship in your firm, and you need people to
show up with their guards down, send an email out ahead of time that
includes real, heartfelt testimonials from three senior leaders sharing
personal, specific examples of the transformative power that a mentor had
on them. In Slim’s case, she knew she was going to need her participants to
behave with an almost irrational degree of trust. They would have to trust
the process, trust her, trust the selection of interlocutors on the other side,
trust that nothing terrible would happen to them when they returned home.
Slim couldn’t afford to cultivate that trusting behavior in them after they

showed up. Because it would be important from the get-go, she nurtured it
during the pregame.
One other lesson is that, whether in Middle East peace talks or at
weekend dance parties, every gathering benefits or suffers from the
expectations and spirit with which guests show up. It’s hard to get a dance
party started, for example, when people show up subdued and in the mood
for quiet conversation. Similarly, if you’re hosting a meeting at work and
hoping to have an honest conversation in which employees share what
they’re actually experiencing, it can be harder to do if they show up cynical
or defensive. Sure, you can try to change their mood when they arrive. But
it takes more energy and sophistication on the part of the host and cuts into
the time for the gathering. It is preferable to pregame.
Priming isn’t hard to do
Lest you think you must become a peace negotiator to gather well, let
me say that a thoughtful email can take care of the need to host your
pregame. Priming can be as simple as a slightly interesting invitation, as
straightforward as asking your guests to do something instead of bring
something.
Consider the case of Michel Laprise, a writer and director at Cirque du
Soleil and collaborator on Madonna’s MDNA tour and Super Bowl halftime
show. He decided one winter to host an end-of-the-year gathering at his
home after a heavy season of touring. The problem was, he hadn’t even had
time to decorate his Christmas tree. He dashed off a quick email to his
guests asking them to send him two photographs of happy moments they’d
had in the past year.
When the guests walked in the door that evening, they found a
Christmas tree decorated with twenty-four printed photographs, cut into
small circles, of their own joyous moments: scuba diving, standing in front
of a house bearing a “Sold” sign, wearing acrobat gear before a
performance. They had a cocktail around the tree, marveling at one
another’s moments. “Suddenly they were not strangers or colleagues, but
the personal part was there, and that started the dinner so well,” Laprise
recalled.

“I think people felt welcome the way they were, and that it was
important for me and for the other people that we hear what’s happiness for
them,” Laprise said. He didn’t explicitly announce a theme for the dinner or
the evening, but “just by doing the action of bringing something that
represents happiness” that “just opened the whole evening on that,” he said.
By dashing off that last-minute email and getting his guests to send
photographs of themselves, Laprise had begun to host them during the
pregame, not just from the formal beginning. By asking them to dig out
photographs from the past year, he was getting them to reflect on it. He was
priming them for a celebration of the year by having them rummage
through it before they showed up. He was putting them into the state of
mind with which he wanted them to pass through the door.
The tree decorations ended up sparking many conversations, and though
Laprise hadn’t intended it, the guests continued to talk about the year’s
highlights over dinner. “It was a Christmas of happiness,” he said.
Laprise understood what many of us miss: Asking guests to contribute to
a gathering ahead of time changes their perception of it. Many of us have no
trouble asking guests to bring a bottle of wine or a side dish, but rarely do
we consider what else we might demand of them in advance. Rarely do we
follow Laprise’s example of asking guests to perform a task that isn’t really
a task so much as an attempt to get them in the mood.
In my own work with organizations, I almost always send out a digital
“workbook” to participants to fill out and return to me ahead of the
gathering. I design each workbook afresh depending on the purpose of the
gathering and what I hope to get guests to think about in advance. The
workbooks consist of six to ten questions for participants to answer. For a
gathering on the future of education at a university, I asked questions like
“What is one moment or experience you had before the age of twenty that
fundamentally impacted the way you look at the world?” and “What are the
institutions in the United States and abroad that are taking a bold, effective
approach to educating the next generation of global problem solvers? What
can we learn from them?” For a gathering on rethinking a national poverty
program, I asked questions like “What is your earliest memory of facing or
coming into contact with poverty?” and “How are our core principles the
same or different from when we started fifty years ago?” For a gathering of
a technology company’s executive team after a merger, I asked questions

like “Why did you join this company?” and “What are the most pressing
questions you think this team needs to address?”
I try to embed two elements in my workbook questions: something that
helps them connect with and remember their own sense of purpose as it
relates to the gathering, and something that gets them to share honestly
about the nature of the challenge they’re trying to address. The workbooks
aren’t so different from a college application in that sense: Sure, they give
me a sense of the person and the dynamics of the group, but they also help
the person think through the things they value before they arrive. I then
design the day based on what I see in their answers. I also weave quotes
from their workbooks into my opening remarks at the convening.
And the workbooks do one further thing: They inadvertently create a
connection between each participant and me, well ahead of our time
together, which makes my job much easier once I’m in the room. By
crafting the workbooks and sending them out, I am sending the participants
an invitation to engage. By filling them out and sending them back to me,
they are accepting. The relationship, and the sharing of confidences, begins
well before we enter the room.
A gathering is a social contract
Priming matters because a gathering is a social contract, and it is in the
pregame window that this contract is drafted and implicitly agreed on.
Why is a gathering a social contract? Because it proceeds from an
understanding between host and guest, sometimes stated and sometimes
unstated, about what each is willing to offer to make it a success. Another
way to say that is that all gatherings come with expectations. There are
expectations of the host—that the agenda will be followed or that food will
be served. There are expectations of the guests—that they will do their
homework and come prepared with ideas; that they won’t bring their three
cousins along; that they will dance their heart out and get others to do so.
These expectations are present whenever people gather, and the prevailing
understanding of what they are constitutes a gathering’s social contract.
As with purpose, it is often through conflict and disgruntlement that
underlying assumptions about a gathering’s social contract reveal
themselves. Once, during a conference in Aspen, some friends of mine

came back from a dinner irritated because of a violation of what they took
to be its social contract. What had been billed as a large but social dinner at
someone’s home was, midway through the evening, transformed into a
brainstorming session on the hosts’ work project. The dinner guests, many
of them not experts in the industry or particularly interested in “working” at
the end of a long day, were suddenly expected to be advisers. My friends,
who were among these nonexpert guests, suddenly realized that the dinner
invitation was the lure; now they were on the hook to help the hosts make
business decisions. Even though the hosts were paying for the dinner, the
guests felt used. You never want your guests to think, “Hey! I never signed
up for this.”
A gathering’s social contract is often invisible to us, even when we are
carrying out its commands. For example, you may not think that last dinner
party you went to had a social contract, but did you bring a bottle of wine or
a six-pack of beer or a dessert? If so, why? Because of the implicit social
contract that sounds too crass to say out loud: They were making you
dinner, and you were helping defray the cost of hosting. Similarly, the social
contract of a networking event may be something like this: I am paying
forty-five dollars to attend this event; in return, you will ensure that there
are better people here than I would meet on my own at the local bar. A
social contract for a gathering answers this question: What am I willing to
give—physically, psychologically, financially, emotionally, and otherwise
—in return for what I expect to receive?
Among the burdens of hosting is drafting this social contract, starting
with that moment of discovery. First things first, the host has the chance to
frame the event. This is where your specific, unique purpose comes into
play. For a funeral, are we coming together to “celebrate and remember,” or
are we gathering to “grieve and to mark”? Those different purposes imply
different types of funerals and different moods and behaviors among guests.
From the first lines of the invitation, there is an opportunity to get your
guests ready for how you want them to show up.
The host can also set the context for the gathering. When I was invited
to the sixteenth annual #Agrapalooza, continuing a summer tradition of
made-up games and a drunken talent show at some friends’ parents’ house,
building on the rituals and memories of all the gatherings before, I was
being invited into a world, not just to an event. When I was invited to a
Passover seder some years ago and the host indicated that it would be a

unique one for her, as it was her first Passover without her mother, I was
being primed, right from that moment of discovery, to understand the
emotional swirl of the gathering. In fact, it is in setting the context that the
Passover Principle—knowing why this night is different from all the other
nights—first has its chance to be communicated to your guests.
And the host can, in drawing up this contract, begin to throw light on the
fundamental bargain that is at the heart of many gatherings, whether or not
we like to think of it in this way. I am in no way advocating for your
gatherings to be made transactional. Rather, I am suggesting that it is
impossible to gather without some kind of implicit deal. And when this deal
isn’t carefully crafted, and when people’s expectations of one another are
out of step with what people are willing to give, problems arise—as with
that evening in Aspen. If you don’t prepare people for the fact that you will
be asking them for advice about your company, if you don’t tell them that
their phones will be taken away for the full day, if you don’t warn them that
they will be asked to share a personal story prompted by a question, you
will often encounter resistance or worse. Trust me. And so part of the job of
the pregame is to find ways, implicit and explicit, to communicate to your
guests what they’re signing up for by saying yes to the invitation.
Now, sometimes when I talk to clients or friends about this idea of a
gathering’s social contract, they fire back: What about mystery and
surprise? You want me to spell everything out? But you needn’t spell things
out in order to prime your guests. Barrett’s friends certainly didn’t send him
a contract to sign to inform him that he would be kidnapped. And yet at
each step of the way he was given a taste of what was to come and given
the chance to choose to keep going.
Naming as priming
So how do you make use of this pregame window to draft the social
contract and set your guests’ expectations? The chance arises with that
moment of discovery I mentioned earlier: with the invitation.
When we invite people to our gatherings, too many of us spend too
much time focusing on the wrong details of the invitation. Letterpressed
versus engraved. Email versus Paperless Post. Black-and-white versus blue-

and-white. This is what might be thought of as the Martha Stewart
approach, elevating the readying of things over the readying of people.
The most important part of your invitation, though, is what it signals to
your guests about your gathering and what it asks of them. And one way to
send your guests a signal is to give your gathering a specific name.
To name a gathering affects the way people perceive it. The name
signals what the purpose of the event is, and it also prepares people for their
role and level of expected participation. If you’re hosting a half-day
gathering for your team to discuss a new strategy, do you call it a
“meeting,” a “workshop,” a “brainstorming session,” or an “idea lab”? Of
these names, “brainstorming session” implies a heavier level of
participation than perhaps “meeting” does. Part of what worked with our “I
Am Here” days, I later realized, was that we gave it a name and that name
primed people for what we most needed from them: presence.
Rachel Greenberger, an administrator at Babson College in
Massachusetts, hosted a weekly meeting for students. She didn’t want to
call this time “office hours,” because it sounded like an obligation as well as
a one-way deal: The student comes to the professor for help and guidance.
But Greenberger was running a food program and wanted to help students
connect to one another, not just to her, and so she decided to call the weekly
hour Community Table. Over time, the gathering has grown into the name;
students now turn up with baked goods as well as notebooks. And in a way
she couldn’t have planned, the Community Table idea she began has now
been transplanted to New York, where every month entrepreneurs,
academics, activists, and students interested in food engage together around
a table, giving and exchanging ideas and building a community.
In my own work, I don’t call my sessions “workshops.” I call them
Visioning Labs. “Visioning” because I am helping people figure out their
vision for their work, company, or life. And “Lab,” short for laboratory,
because it signifies experimentation and possibility, which is crucial to the
process. Simply because of the name, I’ve noticed that people seem to show
up differently. They’re more open, since they’re not sure what to expect
from a Visioning Lab, and they are curious. These are some of the
behaviors I need them to show up with in order to help them in a
meaningful way.
Names help guests decide whether and how they fit into the world
you’re creating. Eve Biddle, cofounder of a creative community called the

Wassaic Project in upstate New York, learned this lesson when she
introduced an “Artist Mixer” to a residency program she was running.
People weren’t showing up, so she asked a few artists why. The evening,
they told her, sounded “too nerdy.” They were artists and free spirits. The
word “mixer” perhaps sounded to some of them like something from the
“sellout” lives they had avoided. She listened and renamed the evening
“Happy Hour.” Attendance shot up. A simple name switch altered people’s
sense of who the gatherer thought they were and what she expected of
them.
Beyond the name, the invitation is full of opportunities for what I think
of as priming language. This language doesn’t have to be confined to text; it
can consist of, or be buttressed by, images and video as well. Whatever the
medium, the purpose of priming is to signal to people the tone and mood
you’re going for at your gathering. When the Walt Disney Company sent
out invitations to its Star Wars: The Force Awakens premiere, the company
reassured its guests that “parking for your Landspeeder, Sandcrawler or
other transportation vehicle will be provided.” Simple as that: This
gathering will be playful, and it is for die-hards who live and breathe Star
Wars.
And in keeping with an earlier chapter’s commandment to be
thoughtfully exclusive, being explicit with your guests ahead of time about
what/who is in and what/who is out can help guests prepare for what is
coming. Take, for example, a line from an invitation to an all-night dance
party in Brooklyn, New York: “As we always say . . . bring your sexy single
friends and leave those strollers at home. This ain’t no Park Slope party”—a
reference to one of the city’s more family-centric neighborhoods. In this
case, a bit of prosaic information is more than that: The relaying of details
doubles as the priming of guests to know how to show up. Even the guest
without children to bring receives a message from that line: This is going to
be a rager.
After the kindling, a Kindle
The invitation is just the beginning. After the moment of discovery, it
would be a mistake not to sustain the excitement. Once the invitation has
done its work, there are many chances along the way to reach out to your

guests and continue the priming. The thoughtful gatherer is conscious of
these moments and uses them to set the tone of the gathering and groom the
guests to uphold their end of the bargain.
I once saw this sustaining done inventively by a conference with a tough
task: to lure high-level government officials to Detroit, and to make them
prepare for it by doing a lot of reading. It was 2009. One weekday, my boss
at the White House Office of Social Innovation and Civic Participation
received a package in the mail. The conference organizers had sent her all
the readings she needed to get through on a brand-new, fully loaded loaner
Kindle. The Kindle was still a relatively new product, and I don’t know that
my boss had ever handled one. This boss, who received hundreds of pieces
of mail and thousands of emails a week and frequently didn’t leave the
office until after 10 p.m., had, even before signing up for this conference,
more backlogged reading to do than she cared to think about. But when that
package arrived, with yet more reading to add to her backlog, she looked at
the Kindle and smiled. Yes, the organizers were asking her to fulfill her part
of the bargain to do the readings. But through the small design choice to
send it on a loaner Kindle, they were able to capture an incredibly busy
woman’s attention and signal, “This one is going to be different.”
This kind of priming is especially important when the host is demanding
a lot or when the guest is of a particularly reluctant sort. Sarah Lyall, a New
York Times reporter who once wrote about her experience of participatory
theater shows in New York, describes herself this way:
All of us have anti-bucket lists of things we do not want to do before
we die, and mine includes any activity requiring potentially
embarrassing public participation. Wearing a costume, declaiming
before a crowd, playing spin the bottle, clapping along to a jaunty
show tune, marching, chanting, speaking spontaneously into a
microphone, ceding free will to a larger force, doing the hokeypokey
and turning myself about—I have made it my business to avoid these
things.
The kinds of gatherings I specialize in creating could be terrifying to
people who share this sensibility. That doesn’t mean there is no place for
such gatherings, or that people with this inclination need to just take or

leave it, or that they should not be invited. It means that some of your
guests will share her aversion, and if you are going to ask anything of them,
you have to be explicit about what you have in mind, and you are going to
have to hold their hand from the moment you first let them know about
your gathering/massive-opportunity-for-a-panic-attack.
USHERING
Between the priming and preparation and the actual opening of a
gathering, there is another, often overlooked step: ushering. In many
gatherings, your guests will benefit from being carried across a proverbial
threshold, leaving the wide world and entering your small kingdom.
I am not suggesting that you carry your subordinates into your next Q4
meeting. (That would be uncomfortable and probably illegal.) Carrying
guests across a threshold sounds intimate and serious, but what I am really
telling you to do is manage your guests’ transition into the gathering you
have bothered to create. Hosts often don’t realize that there tends to be
unfilled, unseized time between guests’ arrival and the formal bell-ringing,
glass-clinking, or other form of opening. Make use of this no-man’s-land.
Managing this entry is important because none of us shows up as a blank
slate to anything. You have seven meetings in a row, and the fourth one
goes badly, and you go into the fifth meeting distracted and spent. You walk
into Thursday small group at your church after crawling through traffic to
get your daughter to basketball practice on time. Right before entering a bat
mitzvah, you receive a text from your boss that your article has been killed.
If you don’t create a passageway into your gathering for guests like these,
they are going to be somewhere else in the most crucial moment of your
gathering: the start.
Passageways and doorways
One way to help people leave their other worlds and enter yours is to
walk them through a passageway, physical or metaphorical.

The world of immersive and participatory theater, knowing how many
people dread public participation, has become very good at constructing
such passageways. What can we learn from them about our own, much
simpler dinners, meetings, and small groups?
Third Rail Projects is a New York–based theater company that
specializes in this. I attended two of its shows to learn how it whisks guests
into alternative universes so quickly. And at least in the two that I attended,
The Grand Paradise and Then She Fell, the directors created literal
passageways for their audience members to spend time in before the show
actually “started.” In The Grand Paradise, which is about a fading tropical
resort in the late 1970s and the cultural values of that era, before we were
let into the “resort,” we were greeted by an overly cheerful activities
director and given a lei and a tropical drink. We were then crammed into a
small, closed room outfitted to look like the inside of an airplane. We were
given instructions by an airline host and on the television screens above us
about what we could and couldn’t do and when we were released into
“paradise.” In Then She Fell, an immersive theater experience inspired by
the writings of Lewis Carroll and staged in an abandoned warehouse, the
fifteen-member audience was first seated in a small reception area with a
doctor character and given an “elixir” that looked like Jägermeister and a
set of keys tied together by a black thread. We were greeted by the doctor,
who explained that this room was a “liminal space” and that we were about
to enter another world.
In both these shows, this spell of ushering is clearly distinguished from
the actual show. The actual show, in our minds, hasn’t yet begun. But the
creators understand that they have an interest in shaping your total
experience, and they understand that things have often begun before they
have formally started. With that same understanding, one of the best-known
performance artists alive, Marina Abramović, has created a replicable
methodology that she uses to transition her audiences from the outside
world into her shows.
Performance art is defined by the Museum of Modern Art as a live event
in which “the artist’s medium is the body, and the live actions he or she
performs are the work of art.” This art form, even more than others, is
interested in the relationship between the audience and the artist.
Abramović has become famous for performance pieces like her 1974 work
Rhythm 0, in which she placed seventy-two objects on a table, including a

gun with a single bullet, for the audience members to do to her whatever
they wanted. More recently, in her piece The Artist Is Present, she sat in a
chair for a total of 736-and-a-half hours as a stream of visitors took turns
sitting in a chair across from her and looking into her eyes in silence. In
each of her pieces, she is, like any good host, hyper-aware of the audience’s
ability to shape the gathering.
Over the years, Abramović has developed the so-called Abramović
Method for Music, which includes a way of preparing her guests for these
performances. When audience members arrive, they are asked to put all
their belongings (including their cellphones) into a locker before entering
the venue. Then they sit in a chair silently, wearing noise-canceling
headphones for thirty minutes to block out all the distractions that keep us
from being truly present. She thinks of this time as a palate cleanser. “The
silence is something that prepares them for their experience,” she told me.
In a show at the Park Avenue Armory, a massive performance space in
New York City, sitting silently, the audience watched the pianist Igor Levit
and his piano slide on a platform into the center of the stage. After thirty
minutes, a gong sounded, signaling that the audience could remove their
headphones. Only then did Levit play the opening note. One guest in
attendance later described the thirty minutes of silence to me in various
phases: At first, there was a lot of collective wriggling and shuffling as
people quieted down and got used to sitting still. Then there was an overall
calming and quiet. About halfway through the silence, though, you could
begin to feel the anticipation and expectation build toward the performance.
After all that time spent in anticipation, a critic later described the opening
note of the aria as a moment of “hypnotic wonderment.” This surely had
something to do with the fact that he had been unplugged from the rest of
the world for thirty minutes, primed to listen in a different way.
For Abramović’s seventieth birthday party, she invited hundreds of
friends and colleagues to the Guggenheim Museum for a celebration. When
you walked in, you were immediately greeted by a row of women dressed
in white lab coats bearing pocket mirrors and sheets of gold foil, standing at
attention in silence. I was ushered over to the women, and one of them
handed me a gold sheet and pointed to my lips. I looked around and realized
that other guests had rectangular strips of gold covering their mouths. I
picked up the strip, used the pocket mirror they held up, and placed the foil
over my lips. Then the woman guided me to sit in a chair, in silence, and

make use of the headphones. I didn’t understand the meaning of all this, but
at some level I didn’t have to. Abramović had taken those moments before
the action, in which people normally just mill around, and created an
opening ritual for each guest. Gold-lipped and headphone-topped, I felt
inducted into a secret society. Though I was intimidated to be there, I was
wearing the signs of one who belonged.
When I asked Abramović about these passageways she creates, she said
simply, “I want to take them from their comfort zone and into a new
experience.” And she realizes that people are more open to new experiences
when the old is cleared away and some space is carved out for the new.
Now, I understand that you may hesitate to force your guests into a
thirty-minute tunnel of silence or place gold foil on their lips. But there are
many tiny ways you can create a threshold, a pause, before you and your
guests cross the starting line together. And you don’t need to be an award-
winning theater producer to do it. The idea of helping people transition
from one state to another is embedded in many rituals of traditional
societies. It’s the equivalent of a doctor taking off her jacket and putting on
her white coat as she enters her office. It’s the act of Muslims washing their
hands and feet before prayer. It can be the removal of shoes before a
Japanese tea ceremony. The only difference with modern gatherings is that
the passageway is not prescribed. You need to create it. And one of the
easiest, most natural places to create such a passageway is the doorway.
Arianna Huffington is a fascinating and controversial woman, thanks to
her work in politics, media, and wellness. She is also a gracious and skilled
gatherer. In 2013, she hosted a conference to explore the ideas of wellness
that would eventually grow into her new company, Thrive. And she chose
to host it in her living room in SoHo in Manhattan. It was essentially a
business conference, and many of the participants were strangers to one
another, and yet Huffington chose to greet them as if they were arriving at a
wedding. She personally stood by the door for a good half hour or hour,
first thing in the morning, and individually greeted each person who
entered. She didn’t have her chief of staff do it, and she didn’t have her
daughters do it. She did it herself. Because she did, she set a tone for the
entire day. Yes, she was saying, we are at a conference, but we don’t have to
act like it. This is my home, and you are my guest.
When my sister-in-law was getting married, her then-fiancé’s Scottish
family had flown in for the festivities. The Friday night before the wedding,

the entire Scottish clan was invited to my in-laws’ home for a party. When
the bus pulled up to the house and all the Scots stepped out in their finery,
my husband and I spontaneously joined my father-in-law by the doorway
and greeted each person as they walked in—dozens of them. This small
welcome created a moment for virtually everyone on the groom’s side to
meet the bride’s family, not at the end of the ceremony or during the
reception but at the outset. This one act sped up the intimacy and the sense
of permission to walk up to anyone over the course of the weekend, which
many of us did. It was an initial act of tribe building, and it happened at the
border of the gathering.
The psychological threshold
Sometimes there is no physical anteroom, as there was in those New
York theater shows I mentioned. Sometimes it wouldn’t be feasible to stand
in the doorway and greet everyone. Sometimes the work of ushering must
be done psychologically rather than physically. I once saw this done
brilliantly by Baratunde Thurston, my comedian friend.
He had been asked to host a comedy event that was part fundraiser, part
party. The venue was the Brooklyn Brewery. On the evening in question, it
was cavernous, rowdy, loud, and full of people full of beer. I could tell that
he had been put in a difficult spot. There actually wasn’t a stage, or even an
elevated platform. People had been eating and drinking for a while already;
they were hanging with their friends and didn’t look like they wanted to be
interrupted. Even the music was no match for the volume of the talking. To
make matters worse, most of the people there had no idea who Baratunde
Thurston was, and despite the fact that he’d just been handed a microphone,
these people were not about to stop their fun to listen to some guy’s jokes.
Rather than screaming over people or just starting up his monologue,
hoping that someone might take pity and listen, Thurston instinctively went
into usher mode. He doesn’t always do this, so the rowdiness of the crowd
must have tipped him off to its need for some kind of transition. He took his
microphone, his only identifiable form of power and authority, over to the
liveliest person in one cluster of friends, and he asked that person to say
their name into the microphone. After they introduced themselves, Thurston
invited everyone else in the room to greet them and clap. Then he walked

over to the next group and the next group in the same way, catching five or
six of the loudest, rowdiest people in the room off guard by bantering with
them, making some jokes, then, essentially, inviting them to support him in
his mission to transform them from a crowd into an audience. Within ninety
seconds, he had the entire room’s attention. He walked back to the middle
of the room and started his set.
No matter what environment you’re given as a gatherer, you might ask
yourself how you could create a transition of this kind—a passageway that
tunes out the prior reality and captures people’s attention and imagination.
By doing so, you create a starting line and, even more important, you help
your guests cross it as a collective.
If we think back to Felix Barrett’s bachelor party, his friends did a great
job of both priming and ushering. They primed him with the notes and
tasks, so that he was constantly on guard for the next thing—and
increasingly aware of the spirit of what loomed. Then, having primed him,
they ushered him toward that opening by kidnapping him and bringing him
to the venue. While I’m not (necessarily) suggesting that you kidnap your
guests, I am suggesting that, like those bachelor party planners, you are
prepared for all the moments leading up to the opening. One of the mistakes
many of us make in thinking about this in-between time is believing that “it
doesn’t count.” It does.
In everyday gatherings, it can be as simple as lighting a candle or
making a welcome announcement or pouring every guest a special drink at
the same time. But the final transition between the guests’ arrival and the
opening is a threshold moment. Anticipation builds between the initial clap
of thunder and the first drops of rain; hope and anxiety mingle. And then
when that opening moment finally comes, it is time to give your guests a
message: A magical kingdom exists, and you are invited inside.
Missed opportunities
When gatherings fail to do this kind of ushering, they often waste their
own potential. Consider the case of a feverish political rally that could have
been so much more.
On April 6, 2016, Bernie Sanders, a senator from Vermont and a
candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination, held a massive rally

in Philadelphia. The line to get into the Philadelphia “Future to Believe In”
Rally wrapped around the block. For security reasons, many people were in
the stadium for close to three hours before the candidate ever appeared.
When I hear that, I think: What an incredible gathering opportunity—three
hours of ushering that could have been used not only to gear people up for
the rally that day but also to build the Bernie Sanders movement. Only it
wasn’t.
Instead, thousands of people sat in the 10,200-seat arena and waited.
There had been the prior world outside, and in a few hours, the official
show would begin. There was little in between, even for a captive and die-
hard audience that would have lapped up anything. Having worked with
organizers, I can imagine exactly why these ones left this time unfilled: In
their mind, the event hadn’t started yet. This time probably wasn’t on their
“run of show.” It was time outsourced to the security people, not the hosts.
So let us imagine what could have been done with that time. A few
thousand fans of Bernie Sanders, a few hours, no candidate on-site. They
could have had some volunteers work as facilitators to get people to sit in
groups, or turn to a stranger, and talk about why they were there, what they
believed the country most needed, and why they believed Sanders was the
answer. They could have set up story circles where clusters of eight sat and
shared their own experiences of being on the wrong end of America’s
economic divide. They could have used that time to create a movement.
They had the complete attention of thousands of people, but because the
time period was mentally scheduled under “waiting,” they didn’t make use
of it. They didn’t understand that they were already hosting.
LAUNCHING
So by now you have prepared your people in the run-up to your
gathering and carried them across the threshold when they arrived. But
what do you actually do at the opening of the gathering? How do you
launch well?
Openings are a big missed opportunity in gatherings. They all too often
underwhelm us, and they don’t have to. After all, openings lay the track for
a gathering. I once met the South African opera composer Neo Muyanga,

who told me that he can listen to the first sixteen bars of any opera and
know the system and framework of the rest of it—and, therefore, whether
he’s going to like it. “The opening bars inevitably set up a paradigm using
elements such as volume, meter, and progression to invite a listener to
eschew their mundane world for a time and to plunge down the rabbit hole
into an alternate universe,” he said. As he spoke, I realized that gatherings
work in much the same way. The opening, whether intentionally designed
or not, signals to guests what to expect from the experience.
In the first few moments of a gathering, we are all Neo Muyanga,
reading cues and asking ourselves: What do I think of this gathering? Am I
in good hands? Is the host nervous? Should I be? What’s going to happen
here? Is this worth my time? Do I belong? Do I want to belong? The
opening is, therefore, an important opportunity to establish the legitimacy
of your gathering.
Attention is at its highest at the outset. Because of what scientists call
“cognitive processing constraints,” we’re not able to remember every
minute of an experience. Our brain effectively chooses for us what we will
remember later. Studies show that audiences disproportionately remember
the first 5 percent, the last 5 percent, and a climactic moment of a talk.
Gatherings, I believe, work in much the same way. And yet we often pay
the least attention to how we open and close them, treating these elements
as afterthoughts.
Don’t kill the attention of mourners
The first change you should make if you want to launch well is to quit
starting with logistics.
I once attended the funeral of a dear friend. The church was packed.
Hundreds of family members, friends, and former colleagues gathered in a
beautiful room to honor a man who had towered in his field and helped so
many. As people entered the pews, they greeted one another. Many of them
had been closely connected through this friend at some point but hadn’t
seen one another in years. Sadness hung in the air, and many of us were
already crying. Then the minister got up and walked to the front of the
room.

The moment was pregnant. All of us leaned in, eager for his words of
comfort. He took a deep breath, looked out at all of us, and began. “Just so
you all know, the family has invited us to join them afterward for a
reception down the street at the rec center,” he said (as best I remember).
“But, unfortunately, I am told there is not enough parking at the venue. It’s
a short walk over, and I encourage you to keep your car here and walk over
together afterward.” In seconds, the potential energy of the moment had
been squandered. We had all been hungry for consoling and coming
together. The moment was ripe, and the minister had our attention. Yet
perhaps because he didn’t want to forget to make the announcement, he
used his moment of launch to discuss parking. The minister had wasted
what could’ve been an unforgettable opening to connect the tribe that had
gathered around one man. Instead, he started with logistics.
The minister is hardly alone in this habit. Because we think the moments
before we start somehow don’t matter, any number of gatherings begin with
throat clearing. Conferences that commence this way: “Before we start,
there’s a white Camaro with its lights on in the parking lot, license plate
TXW 4628.” Town halls that begin with announcements. Galas, full of
people dressed in their finery, that launch with a long set of thank-yous to
the event’s sponsors. I’m speaking, in short, of every gathering whose
opening moments are governed by the thought: “Let’s first get some
business out of the way.” It may seem like I’m nitpicking, but what I’m
proposing couldn’t be more vital to the work of gathering better.
The politics of beginning
I imagine many people will, perhaps grudgingly, agree with me
regarding events like funerals. In theory, no one believes in starting a
funeral (or other intimate and personal gathering) with logistics. It’s just a
failure to live up to what we imagine would be best. But with other
gatherings, ones where sponsors are involved and there are people to be
thanked, I know many hosts will say: I have no choice. I cannot not start
with logistics.
I disagree. What I tell the hosts I work with is this: However vital it may
seem to start with this housekeeping, you are missing an opportunity to sear
your gathering’s purpose into the minds of your guests. And sometimes you

are actually undermining that purpose by revealing to your guests that you
do not, in fact, care about the things you claim to care about as much as you
profess.
Every year, the Personal Democracy Forum hosts its annual conference
in New York City. This gathering of hundreds of people brings together
leading civic activists, technologists, community organizers, civil servants,
and others interested in the state of democracy. In 2015, the theme of the
conference was “Imagine All the People: The Future of Civic Tech.” The
organizers chose this theme because, they explained, “we want to take you
into a future where everyone is participating, a future that we build together
using technology appropriately, powering solutions to shared civic
problems.”
And so it was a bit jarring when, in the opening session that year, the
Personal Democracy Forum began with one of the founders, Andrew
Rasiej, turning the stage over to a representative of its “presenting sponsor,”
a Microsoft executive, to speak first.
What’s the big deal? you say. Here’s the big deal: In those first few
moments, people are at their most ready to be inspired. They are asking:
What is this really about? Who holds the keys? People have come,
presumably, because they are attracted to the theme of the forum: the idea
that democracy can be activated and more people can participate, not just
the powerful and well-connected. And then, in those first few moments, the
organizers end up replicating the very thing that gets in the way of
democracy and the participation of people—money buying special access.
By starting with remarks from a corporate sponsor—as opposed to, say,
inviting various local community leaders onstage to speak in short bursts—
they embodied the problem they were seeking to address.
Sponsors are there to amplify what you can do with an event. However,
the moment the host of the event is not also the person funding the event,
the event has two masters: the host and the sponsor. And their interests are
not always aligned. This misalignment can arise throughout your gathering,
but it is often most painfully clear in the opening and closing. So a host
must be aware of the fact that handing over precious real estate to sponsors
is never costless or neutral. As in the case of the Personal Democracy
Forum, it may even raise doubts about the gathering’s premise.
If you need some inspiration to push back against those sponsors,
consider the case of George Lucas. When he was filming the original Star

Wars, he wanted a bold launch for his movie. The Directors Guild of
America protested. Most films at the time started by naming the writer and
director in the opening title sequence—in this case, thanking the film’s
creators rather than its sponsors. It was how things were done. Despite the
protests of the Directors Guild, Lucas decided to forgo opening credits
entirely. The result was one of the most memorable beginnings in movie
history. And he paid for it—the Directors Guild fined him $250,000 for his
daring. His loyalty was to his audience’s experience, and he was willing to
sacrifice for it. You should be, too.
The cold open
The creators of television shows often find themselves in the same boat
as Lucas was back then, and some have devised a solution that may be more
straightforwardly applied to gatherings: the cold open.
The cold open is the practice of starting a TV show directly with a scene
rather than with opening credits. In the 1950s, directors started
experimenting with cold opens, seeking to sustain an audience’s attention
after the previous show ended and keep people from flipping to another
channel. When Saturday Night Live starts with a skit of several minutes that
sometimes seems like part of a news show or other program, and only later
reveals itself when the performers scream “Live from New York, it’s
Saturday Night!” it is deploying the cold open at its best. The show
understands that attention is everything in television, and once you have
captured it, you can take care of business, thank people, attend to
housekeeping.
Every gathering, to be sure, has logistical demands. People need to know
where the bathroom is. People need to know where lunch can be found.
There are often last-minute changes to announce. But people do not need to
know this information at the very first moment of your gathering. It’s not
that you don’t need time for logistics and the like. Just don’t start with
them. Open cold.
Honor and awe your guests

Once you bar the housekeeping from your opening, what should you
actually start with? My answer is simple: Your opening needs to be a kind
of pleasant shock therapy. It should grab people. And in grabbing them, it
should both awe the guests and honor them. It must plant in them the
paradoxical feeling of being totally welcomed and deeply grateful to be
there.
This notion of honoring and awing is in some ways better practiced
outside of gathering than within it. People who do things as far afield as
writing novels and decorating hotel lobbies tend to be adept at this
simultaneous work of making audiences feel flattered and unworthy. Any
author will regale you in great detail with tales of how long she labors over
her opening sentences. Ask hoteliers about the theory behind the practice of
lobby design, and they will tell you what a difference certain tweaks make.
Each of these is its own professional domain. What intrigues me is what
their approaches have in common. When Melville opens Moby-Dick with
“Call me Ishmael,” and when the Four Seasons lobby greets you with
flowers taller than you, both, I believe, are honor-awing.
In each of these openings, we are being made to feel slightly
overwhelmed while at the same time made to feel welcome; our attention is
gripped even as our nerves are soothed. When Melville addresses you, the
reader, confidently and directly, there’s a familiarity he’s assuming, but
there is also a confidence. He is not explaining an entire world to you. He is
simply welcoming you into a world. Similarly, the flowers in the Four
Seasons are stunning and maybe taller than you, and that awes you,
intimidates you, makes you remember that you don’t live like this back
home. But of course the flowers are there for you, to honor you.
Few understand the art of honor and awe better than Dario Cecchini, an
eighth-generation Tuscan butcher in the village of Panzano in Chianti, Italy.
When you walk into the Macelleria Cecchini, a tiny butcher shop that
attracts as pilgrims some of the leading chefs in the world, you instantly see
Cecchini’s mastery of openings. He hugs almost everyone who walks in,
whether stranger or friend. He may hand a bewildered newcomer a cup of
wine and a piece of bread spread with lard the moment they step into the
shop. Most nights, after hours, right above the butcher shop, he seats thirty
strangers at a long wooden table before a roaring grill. Before anyone gets a
bite of his preparations, he raises two bloody Fiorentina steaks above his
head, thundering, “To beef, or not to beef!”

His guests—some old friends, others who have wandered in off the
street—are awed and captivated. Then, despite all the hovering staff,
Cecchini serves the grilled meat onto the guests’ plates himself, an attentive
server who also happens to be an Italian celebrity. He is honoring his guests
by engaging with them, even though he may not share a language with
them. He moves around the table, visiting each guest, shaking hands,
pausing and listening to stories, pinching cheeks, laughing heartily.
Cecchini is fully alive in his butcher shop, and he makes you feel so, too.
Cecchini is the man onstage, but he’s also your host, your guide, your
friend. As he models openness and passion, he wakes up those parts in you.
Suddenly you find yourself turning to strangers, taking small risks, and
asking unexpected questions, behaving differently than you would in a
typical restaurant.
When you awe as a host, you are in a sense putting yourself—and your
gathering—above your guest. When you honor, you are placing your guest
above you. When you do both at once, as Cecchini does, you end up—with
a hat tip to Groucho Marx—making your guests feel like valued members
of a club to which they have no business belonging.
There are many ways to accomplish this honoring and awing. I once had
a teacher named Sugata Roychowdhury, who, on the first day of accounting
class, took attendance in a legendary way. Instead of lowering his head over
a checklist and droning out names, he walked around the room, holding eye
contact with the seventy or so new students in the lecture hall, and, one by
one, pointed at each student and stated their (sometimes quite complicated)
first and last names. They had never laid eyes on him before, nor he them.
He took the entire class’s attendance from memory. We were mesmerized.
He must have studied our photos and practiced our names for hours ahead
of time. This is an example of taking a totally banal element of gathering—
roll call—and, with a few hours of effort, transforming it into a dramatic
opening.
Professor Roychowdhury created an unforgettable moment that sent two
important signals: that he cared deeply about his teaching and that he had a
brilliance that might rub off on us if we made the effort to learn.
I don’t want you to think that you have to be a famous Italian butcher or
a brilliant accounting professor capable of memorizing seventy names and
faces to honor and awe your guests. And so here is one more story of
honoring and awing, applied in the most simple of contexts.

I had invited my stepsister and her husband for lunch. They live in
Washington, D.C., and my husband and I don’t see them very often, but
they happened to be visiting relatives in New Jersey one weekend.
Ten minutes before they were due to arrive, my husband walked into the
living room confused as to why I hadn’t set the table. In my mind, it was
“just Lauren”—a casual meal with someone to whom I’m close enough not
to need formality. Part of the intimacy of having her over, I thought, would
be setting the table together when she arrived. But my husband thought we
should make her feel special and insisted that we set the table beforehand.
A minute after we finished, the doorbell rang. They were here. After hugs
in the hallway, Lauren walked into the dining room and a look of surprise
popped onto her face.
“Who’s coming over?” she asked.
“You are!” Anand and I both said, laughing. She couldn’t believe we had
set the table for her, and she was clearly moved. I think she felt honored that
we would make the extra effort for her, and she felt awed that we had set it
so beautifully.
Fuse your guests
After the initial shock therapy of honoring and awing, you have your
guests’ attention. They want to be there. They feel lucky to be there. They
might well be considering giving the gathering their all. Your next task is to
fuse people, to turn a motley collection of attendees into a tribe. A talented
gatherer doesn’t hope for disparate people to become a group. She makes
them a group.
The organization Tough Mudder creates weekend obstacle courses for
the kind of people who like weekend obstacle courses. During these trials,
participants can run through a field of live wires, swim in a dumpster
chilled with 75,000 pounds of ice, and so on. While Tough Mudder is
essentially a type of marathon, its opening rituals are very different from the
rituals you might see at traditional marathons, which are individual in
nature, with runners focused almost exclusively on their own performance.
At the starting line of a Tough Mudder race, every participant is asked to
raise their right hand and repeat in unison the Tough Mudder Pledge:

As a Tough Mudder, I pledge that
I understand that Tough Mudder is not a race but a challenge.
I put teamwork and camaraderie before my course time.
I do not whine—kids whine.
I help my fellow Mudders complete the course.
I overcome all fears.
Unlike a marathon, a collective physical challenge that is experienced
individually above all, Tough Mudder is designed as a collective physical
challenge that is experienced collectively. Its pledge primes the contenders
to help one another physically and emotionally, even at a cost to their own
personal success. Will Dean, the founder of Tough Mudder, told Forbes:
“Tough Mudder was built on the principle that the true prize is to cross the
finish line together. It is nearly impossible to complete many of our
obstacles alone and this forces Mudders to ask each other for help. The
interdependence that comes from this fosters an incredible sense of
community and creates an investment in the success of others, not just
yourself.” Dean and his colleagues understood that to reorient their
participants from competing to collaborating, they would need to do
something at the opening of the race—this small but lasting act of fusing.
A pledge is one way to bind your guests, but there are others. Some of
the most compelling approaches involve helping your guests see and be
seen by one another. The simple act of your guests’ acknowledging one
another and confirming their own presence is a crucial step we often forget
when we gather. In the Zulu tribe, this acknowledgment is baked into the
very language of their call-and-response greeting:
Greeting: “Sawubona.” (I see you.)
Response: “Ngikhona.” (I am here.)
In the hustle-bustle of modern life in the West, we often skip this step.
This is what happens in many churches when the pastor invites the
congregation to shift its attention from the pulpit to one another and to wish
a round of “Good morning” or “Happy Easter.” This kind of invitation is
missing from too many gatherings and can be especially powerful at the
outset.

Jill Soloway, the writer and director, will rarely begin a day of shooting
without the people who work for them (Soloway uses the gender-neutral
pronoun “they”) having connected in this way. Soloway, the Emmy-
winning showrunner behind the series Transparent and I Love Dick, calls
the ritual “Box.” After breakfast, once all the actors and extras have arrived
and the set and equipment have been arranged, Soloway or another director
of a particular episode will decide it is time for Box. A production assistant
will place a wooden box in a central area with plenty of space around it. As
soon as the crew sees the box, people start gathering around in a wide circle
while clapping and chanting “Box, Box, Box, Box!” The chanting persists
until everyone has joined the circle and speeds up until someone hops up on
the box to speak. Once someone is standing on the box, that person has the
floor.
People share whatever is on their mind—worries about an old friend, a
death in the family, how they’re feeling about their own acting. “People get
up on the box and they talk about their problems, they talk about their
breakthroughs, and you cry and you release,” Jay Duplass, who plays Josh
in Transparent, told The Hollywood Reporter. “Things get purged prior to
the workday that set the tone for the tenderness and brilliance that gets
delivered,” Trace Lysette, another cast member, was quoted as saying.
“That’s how Jill likes to work.”
Soloway’s commitment to fusing the tribe is so deep that they include
the extras in the Box ritual.
Griffin Dunne, an actor in I Love Dick, remembers one extra who was
supposed to be in a restaurant scene, sitting two tables over from the main
action. The extra ascended the box one day. “This woman got up there to
say that she’s the manager of a bank down the street and that she’d never
had this experience before of feeling involved, like a family,” he recalled.
“Guest stars, and I’m not exaggerating, cry when they leave our set,”
Amy Landecker, an actor on Transparent, told Bustle.com. “They’re so
upset that they don’t get to stay and that the rest of the business does not
function that way.”
Box usually takes twenty to twenty-five minutes, but it can go as long as
forty minutes before they start the actual rehearsal. Soloway gives the ritual
the time it needs. Christina Hjelm, who works as an assistant to Soloway,
described to me how they close Box once the time is right and transition
into rehearsal:

Once there seems to be a lull in folks wanting to get up on the box,
the AD will make a show of circling the crowd, giving any last
takers the opportunity to hop up and speak. If no one hops up on the
box by the time the assistant director has circled the whole crowd,
the AD will then hop on the box and give their closing remarks. The
closing remarks typically consist of any special shooting instructions
for the day and safety warnings the crew needs to keep in mind
while on set. They then end it by shouting the safe word of the day
and having the crowd shout it back to them. Popular safe words on
our sets have been “Bucky” and “Chicken.”
Box is an opening ritual that connects a large team to one another, clears
people’s minds, and creates a passageway of sorts into rehearsal. “It turns
into this collective moment for everyone to connect before we start
working,” Landecker has said. Box also creates a sense of authenticity—
part of the secret sauce of making the show, and one of the values that its
storylines explore—among the team. “We get to play, like children,”
Soloway told another interviewer. “Nobody has to worry about getting
anything wrong.” In around twenty minutes, the director transforms a bunch
of actors and extras into a tribe, by making them see one another.
Baratunde Thurston once applied this idea of guests seeing and being
seen to a get-together of friends. He was throwing a holiday party in his
home and realized that all his guests didn’t know one another. He was the
hub connecting us spokes, and so he took it upon himself to make sure
everyone who came got to know everyone else. And he did so by creating a
unique opening moment for everyone.
As each guest arrived, Thurston would start clapping and yelling,
“Atención, atención!” All the other guests would turn and look as he
playfully yelled, “Announcing . . . Katie Stewart!” He then went on to tell
the room a few details about Katie that others might be interested in: “I first
met Katie at a surfing class, where it turns out she was the best surfer in the
class. Katie moved to New York three years ago from a job in Kenya. She is
a neighbor—go, Brooklyn!—and has two pugs. My favorite thing about
Katie is that, despite having a crazy job, whenever I call her, she picks up.”
The other guests would burst into applause after each introduction. It was a
bit of a shtick, but the introductions were funny, insightful, and unexpected,
and Thurston owned it, so everyone went along.

In thirty seconds, he built each guest up while giving everyone in the
room three or four pieces of interesting grist to connect to. He didn’t reduce
anyone to their profession. He’d leave some mystery (I wonder what that
crazy job is). He did it for each guest, and each guest looked at once
embarrassed, thrown off guard, and pleased.
His jovial, attention-getting introductions gave everyone in the room
permission to look at one another, know something about one another, have
a way into the horizontal ties that the evening had lacked at the outset. As a
host, he was honoring each guest by spending time on them. Like Cecchini,
he put himself “below” them by lifting them up. And yet by taking the time
to pause the entire room and get everyone’s attention, he was also putting
himself above his guests. He used his generous authority to pause the
gathering. Like Abousteit, Thurston rescued the guests from having to
introduce themselves to others, and in the process he also created an
ambient awareness for each guest of every other.
The importance of a group “seeing” one another may sound trivial, but it
can be deadly serious. Until recently, when medical teams gathered to
operate on a patient, studies showed that they often didn’t know one
another’s names before starting. A 2001 Johns Hopkins study found that
when members introduced themselves and shared concerns ahead of time,
the likelihood of complications and deaths fell by 35 percent. Surgeons, like
many of us, assumed that they shouldn’t waste time going through the silly
formalities of seeing and being seen for something as important as saving
lives. Yet it was these silly formalities that directly affected the outcomes of
surgeries. Even with such complex and intricate work, it was when the
nurses and doctors and anesthesiologists practiced good gathering
principles that they felt more comfortable speaking up during surgery and
offering solutions.
If your gathering has an audience, there are other ways of making people
aware of one another. Conferences tend to be terrible at this. They tend to
be full of vertical connections between the stage and the guests but are short
on horizontal linkages binding guests to one another.
Spark Camp, a weekend-long conference started by five friends in the
media industry, was created in part to test if a more horizontally oriented
conference was possible. It was founded on the belief that “conferences can
be re-imagined as efficient, creative gatherings that further innovation and
spark practical solutions to the challenges the industry faces.” Like

Thurston, the organizers of Spark Camp have learned how to use their
authority to turn guests into a community from the beginning. On the
opening evening, rather than asking seventy people to introduce themselves,
the organizers take over. And, unlike me at that dinner party I ruined, they
do it with preparation and care.
Right before the opening dinner, the organizers gather everyone and
deliver “highly personal, whimsical” introductions of each person, ending
with their name, according to a report by the conference. Andrew Pergam,
one of the founders, explained the thinking to me:
It’s pretty simple: We’d been to enough other events where people
write their own fancy introductions, listing every accolade in the
third person, that we thought we should do it for them—but do it in a
way that helped people stand out. We really believe that we invite
the whole person to attend Spark Camp, and rather than an intro that
focuses solely on their professional achievements, we wanted the
intro to help round the individual out, personally.
As attendees, whom the organizers call Campers, recognize themselves,
they are asked to stand. “You’ll often see a lot of eyes darting around the
room, and some careful deep thinking before someone stands up,” Pergam
said. The organizers “spend an inordinate amount of time doing research on
an individual” and “find obscure details about someone’s past and marry
that with all of their other achievements.” It not only spares the Campers
the pressure of introducing themselves to dozens of other people, it also
gives them easy ways to go up to one another later. Pergam said:
For one, it levels the playing field, with even the most accomplished
among us relegated to our interpretation of their background—and
the whims of our Internet researching abilities. We’re implicitly
saying, “We’ve invited you here to be your whole self, not just your
bona fides at work”; explicitly, we’re saying, “We take your
accomplishments seriously—all of them.” And we’ll often find
people saying to each other, “Oh, you’re the fiddler!” or “Wait—
you’re the one who met your husband at a beekeeping convention!”

You can even bond an audience while giving a lecture. For example,
observe a talented presenter like Esther Perel, a relationship and sex
therapist and seasoned speaker who regularly addresses crowds of more
than one thousand people. In addition to her intriguing content, Perel is so
sought after because of how she connects audience members to one another,
signaling in subtle ways that they are not alone. If someone asks Perel a
question about cheating or divorce or boredom, before answering it, she’ll
look out at the audience and ask, “How many of you can relate to this
question?” Or, “Who also wonders about this?” In that simple act, she
transforms a one-to-many speech into a collective experience.
Moderators at conferences could learn from Perel. They tend to
overfocus on their panelists and the questions they are going to ask. The
talented moderator understands that even a panel is not a stand-alone
conversation. It exists within the context of a gathering. And so the solution
might simply be to turn to the audience in the beginning of the session and
ask: How many of you consider yourself an expert on artificial intelligence?
How many of you are working in the field? How many of you are thinking
about this for the first time? How many of you just realized you’re in the
wrong session?
Whenever I do a Visioning Lab, whether it’s at a government agency, a
university, or a financial institution, within the first five minutes of my
opening I always say something like this: “I want you to imagine you’re
building a spiderweb together. That each of you has strings coming out of
your wrists that connect with the other thirty-two people here. We can only
go as deep as the weakest thread will allow. Now, none of you are the
weakest link.” Everyone usually laughs nervously at that part. “No one’s
going to be voted off the island. But the weakest thread between two of you
is what’s going to determine how deep we can go together.” I make this
explicit, and I remind them of it during their breaks and at other moments of
transition. Build a web, build a web, build a web. Because it’s not about
their connection to me. It’s this psychological inter-stitching of the group
that allows you and them to take risks, build together, and have the boldest
version of whatever gathering they’re having.
Above and beyond

For some gatherings, like your regular Monday-morning work meeting,
honoring and awing may feel like trying too hard—though I would urge you
to think about Jill Soloway’s example. My own belief is that any kind of
gathering can practice any of these elements at least a little.
But if you want to do more than a little, if you really want to go to the
next level with your opening, here is some extra credit: Try to embody, with
that opening, the very reason that you felt moved to bring a group of human
beings together. Try to make your gathering’s purpose felt in those first
moments.
Daniel Barrett is an elementary-school teacher at Brooklyn Heights
Montessori School. He told me that he and his fellow teachers purposefully
launch the first day of school with students knitting. “We call it ‘hand
work,’ and it’s a way for the students to be quiet together and have
something to focus on,” Barrett said. “It’s also meant to help with their
handwriting because they’re working on their fine motor skills.” On the
first day of school, the school brings in the first-graders for just a half day
and begins to initiate them into the core principles of a Montessori-run
school, one of which is community. So how does Barrett embody the idea
of a community on the first day?
He takes a ball of string and throws it to a student, saying something
nice to her. And then the child continues the practice, holding her part of the
string and throwing the ball to another student and saying another nice
thing, and so on, until the group has built a spiderweb of string. “If I tug my
end of the web, everyone else feels it move, and that’s what a community
is,” Barrett tells them. “All of your choices, all of your actions, large or
small, will affect everybody else.”
Barrett has found a creative, age-appropriate way to remind his students
—his guests—why they’re doing what they’re doing. A thoughtful opening
moment like that can change the course of a gathering—even one whose
duration is measured in years.

W
Six
Keep Your Best Self Out of My
Gathering
•       •       •
e have spoken so far of gathering with purpose, and of making
practical choices that flow from that purpose. You have absorbed
my pleas to own your power as a host, but to rule generously. You
have encountered examples of people spicing up their gatherings with rules
and fleeting formats. You’ve been instructed what not to do in your
opening, and what to do once you stop doing those things—and how to
ready guests before it even starts.
Now your event is under way. The tracks are laid. Things are rolling.
Your thoughts may turn to where many of my friends’ and clients’ thoughts
do: the question of how to get those you gather to be more authentic. How
do you keep people real? I have some suggestions. Fifteen, in fact.
15 WAYS TO MAKE A CONFERENCE—OR ANY
KIND OF GATHERING—SUCK LESS
Nowhere is puffed-up phoniness more palpable than at conferences.
Nowhere else is the chance to have conversations across borders, identities,
and professions so often wasted. Nowhere else are so many people with the
influence to change things so frequently brought together, only for the
resulting conversations to remain on the surface. They lurk there because
everyone is presenting the best self they think others expect to meet.

If you had to pick the setting where this “conference self” is at its worst,
you might well choose the meetings of the World Economic Forum, an
organization that convenes the world’s rich and powerful several times a
year, most famously in Davos, Switzerland. Which is why, a few years ago,
a colleague and I set out to see if we could hack the WEF. Could we create
an anti-WEF on the sidelines of a WEF event? Could we induce people
trained to present themselves as perfectly baked loaves to bring dough
worth sharing instead? Might we have better conversations about what the
world actually needs when people drawn from a dazzling array of
backgrounds share their full selves, not just their puffery?
The event we decided to infect with our gathering ideas was an annual
WEF conclave in the United Arab Emirates, a couple of months before the
major event in Davos. The purpose of this earlier conference is, in part, to
surface ideas and agendas for Davos. The WEF organizes dozens of “global
agenda councils” on issues ranging from artificial intelligence to the future
of the oceans. Each council is instructed to “provide innovative thinking on
critical global issues and incubate projects, events, and campaigns for the
public good.” Nine hundred council members meet in the UAE for three
days of meetings to discuss the work they have been doing throughout the
year on their topics and to suggest new directions.
The people chosen to join these councils are invited because of their
accomplishments and their strengths, not because of their vulnerability. For
this reason, the meetings, and even the dinners and coffee breaks, can
become like show-off sessions, with round after round of one-upmanship.
Even when they were not competitive, the conversations I was part of often
remained superficially intellectual, with little realness or emotional risk. It
was like many conferences I have attended: you go, try to impress people
with how smart you are, perhaps come away with a few new work
opportunities. But it was difficult to have any authentic engagement.
Everyone tended to behave like his or her own brand ambassador and press
secretary. Given that this wasn’t an insurance industry conference but an
event about addressing the biggest problems of humanity, this superficiality
seemed to interfere with our chances of doing so.
I had been invited that year to join the WEF Global Agenda Council on
New Models of Leadership. According to a past report by that council, its
focus was to understand and create an in-depth dialogue about the
“profound shift in the context in which leadership takes place and in what it

takes to flourish as a leader.” Specifically, the council felt that changes in
the world were “opening up a new leadership space.” It said that space was
defined by, among other things, “the emotional capacity of the leader
(values, courage, self-awareness, authenticity)” as well as “the extent and
depth of their social relationships and networks.” Perhaps because of this
focus, many of us on the council were struck by how the WEF’s culture
made it hard for leaders to develop along these dimensions. A colleague of
mine on the council, a German marketing executive named Tim Leberecht,
and I wondered if an experiment could change that.
Our experiment, perhaps not surprisingly, involved gathering differently.
We suggested throwing a small dinner the night before the conference
began, with members from various other WEF councils. Our goal was both
simple and very complicated: to get people to turn off their networking
engines and elevator pitches and get them to connect—humanly,
authentically.
But how do you create an intimate dinner at a networking event? How
do you get people to be vulnerable when they show up invulnerable? How
do you create a work dinner that feels more like a rehearsal dinner? How do
you take people who have come to hawk one idea or organization and
restore them, for a night, into the complex, multifaceted human beings they
actually are? How do you allow for weakness and doubt in people who
normally exude certainty and confidence?
At first, we focused on the normal preparations: We booked a private
room in a restaurant. We invited fifteen guests from various councils, many
of whom we did not know but who intrigued us. To help focus the evening,
we chose a theme: “a good life.” We had used that theme previously on
another project we had worked on and knew it was a rich topic—and one
we were well prepared to moderate as a result. It was also purposefully a
good life (as in, what do we think makes for a good life?), not the good life.
The night before the dinner, I had trouble sleeping. Why did we invite
all these people? What if it doesn’t go well? What if no one speaks? What if
the theme doesn’t work? I was worried about the actual conversation, the
one part I assumed I could not shape ahead of time. I felt there was too
much riding on our ability to facilitate a complicated conversation among
fifteen strangers. And while we had spent so much time mastering every
other detail down to choosing the opening welcome drink, we hadn’t given
much thought to the actual structure of the conversation. We were winging

it. I wanted to make something intimate. But I had not actually designed for
intimacy.
That day I had lunch with my mother and husband, who were with me
on the trip. As we ate in a badly lit mall in Abu Dhabi, I shared my
anxieties. Why would people share authentically? How was I going to
decide who goes when? I put my facilitator hat on and started to think about
potential structures. The most basic, and easily forgotten, gathering
principle returned to me: We needed to design for what we wanted.
What if, instead of just introducing the theme of “a good life,” we asked
each guest, at some point in the night, to give a toast to “a good life,”
whatever that phrase means to them? OK, that was good. But what if people
just waxed on and on about some grandiose idea of theirs?
Another idea: What if we asked them to start their toasts with a personal
story or experience from their own life? We were making progress. But this
was a lot to ask of people.
What if no one wanted to toast? What if everyone waited in long
silences between toasts?
Then came the clincher: What if we made the last person sing their
toast? I laughed when my husband proposed this, but he was serious. It
would set a brisk pace for the evening and add some nice risk.
That evening, the guests arrived, not knowing what to expect, but people
seemed intrigued and excited to be there. They were senior advisers to
presidents, CEO types, journalists, entrepreneurs, and activists. We were
split relatively equally by gender. The ages ranged from our early twenties
to our eighties. People hailed from half a dozen different countries. We
stood at the entrance of the room and handed each guest a welcome
cocktail, warmly introducing them to one another. They saw their names
written on cards and realized that there would be a seating order.
When we sat down, I raised my glass and thanked everyone for coming.
I introduced myself and Leberecht. We described the theme and our reasons
for wanting to hold this dinner. We explained the rules, including the
singing rule and the Chatham House Rule (borrowed from the Royal
Institute of International Affairs) that we had adopted, which allows people
to talk about their experience of a private meeting and share the stories that
emerge, but forbids specific attributions to any of the participants. We also
instructed people to begin each toast by telling a story, and to signal when

they were done by raising a glass to the value or lesson behind that story.
And, at last, we began.
The first three toasts went quickly: The first toaster drew from the well
of her own story to talk about a good life as a life with choices. (“To
choice!”) The second toaster spoke of her work in disaster-relief efforts and,
as she did, became emotional. Her toast showed the group that it was
acceptable to be human when you care deeply about something. In the third
toast, a man talked about three elements he thought made a good life: to
work for oneself, to work for others, and to have fun. He ended his toast by
saying, “Two out of three ain’t bad.” Someone then burst into song, singing:
“Two out of three ain’t bad!” Everyone started laughing. (“To two out of
three!”) The group was starting to relax.
At that point there was a lull, and we took a break to eat and chat with
the people around us. I began to think about what I was going to say. I had a
distinct advantage going into the dinner, as I had known the theme in
advance. I had a toast idea in mind. In that moment, though, I realized that I
wasn’t really taking a risk with that toast. An image came to mind of a good
life, and it was a moment from when I was eleven. Then I thought: I can’t
share that with this group. My heart started pounding, a sign that I tend to
interpret as saying, Do it. I took a breath, hands shaking, and clinked my
glass. People seemed surprised that I was going to go so early in the
evening.
I began with the idea that a good life is about seeing and being seen, and
launched into a very personal story about a time when I had felt seen. This
is roughly what I can remember of what I shared:
When I was eleven years old, I got my period. I was sleeping over at
a friend’s house in Maryland and wasn’t sure how to react. I didn’t
tell my friend, but went home the next day and told my mother. I was
at an age where a lot of my beliefs and judgments about things came
from other people’s reactions, and I watched hers closely. When she
heard, she hooted and hollered and lifted me up and swung me
around, laughing with joy. She then danced all over the house
celebrating. I learned that day, from her reaction, that being a woman
was something to be celebrated. But she didn’t stop there. Two
weeks later, my mother threw me a period party.

People at the table began to laugh and clap in delight. Even the men, to
my great relief. I continued. I shared the story of my period party as I could
remember it:
She invited her female friends rather than mine, all older women
who had passed through this important transition of womanhood
themselves. I received presents from each woman. One guest gave
me my first pair of pink lace underwear, because one of her favorite
things about being a woman was “opening the underwear drawer and
seeing a splash of color.” They sang me songs, including my
mother’s favorite two songs: “On Children,” by Sweet Honey in the
Rock, and Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young’s “Teach Your Children.”
That day, I knew I mattered. I was seeing, and I was being seen. I
was being witnessed. And to me, that was a good life. And a small
surprise for you all: My mother is here with us, sitting right over
there.
My mother happened to be on another council at the forum. Because we
have different last names, no one knew we were related. Everyone was
stunned to realize that a woman who was sitting at the table, someone they
might have known only as a World Bank expert on poverty, was also a
mother who had designed a period party for her daughter. I was still shaking
from telling such a vulnerable story, but I thought, What the hell, hoping it
would crack others open.
The wine flowed and the toasts continued. One woman shared her
mother’s words on her deathbed: “I spent 90 percent of my time worrying
about things that didn’t matter. Don’t do that.” Once the topic of death was
introduced, I noticed it showing up in several other toasts. After all,
thinking about what makes a good life implies thinking about life ending,
about it being of limited quantity. Another person now said in her toast that
she was going to tell us something “weird” she does every morning,
something she’s never told others about. Every morning, she does a “death
meditation,” in which she imagines she has died, sees all the people she
loves and all she’s left behind in this world, and just hovers over the scene,
watching. She then wiggles her fingers and toes and comes back, deeply
grateful to be alive, perhaps a little more aware of what she values. It turned

out that, for her, part of having and savoring a good life was keeping aware
of death. She then raised her glass and toasted something like “To death!,”
signaling she was done. “To death!” we replied, glasses in the air.
As the night went on, tears welled more and more in the eyes of people
speaking and the eyes of people listening. Not because they were sad, but
because they were moved. Over the course of the evening, people stood up,
one after another, and over and over again we heard some version of “I have
no idea what I’m going to say” or “I hadn’t planned on saying this” or “I’ve
never said this out loud before.” People dropped their scripts.
One man pointed out that certain superheroes wear their underwear
outside their costumes. We laughed. It was a perfect metaphor for what we
attempted that night—and what I am challenging you to cultivate in your
gatherings. And, yes, at last, the final person sang. He closed his toast with
a Leonard Cohen song. A line about cracks allowing for light shimmered
over a room that had, for one moment, practiced letting go of that most
consuming of worries.
It was a moving, beautiful night. All these people whose titles usually
enter the room before they do left their egos at the door. They showed us
fresh, raw, honest sides of themselves. The dinner pointed to what was
possible at gatherings like this.
REALNESS CAN BE DESIGNED
After that moving evening in Abu Dhabi, we decided to take our format
on the road. We called it 15 Toasts, after the number of people around that
inaugural table, and we scouted for other stuffy gatherings that could use an
injection of human feeling. One or both of us, and even some former
attendees who felt comfortable facilitating, went on to host 15 Toasts
dinners on the sidelines of events in South Carolina, Denmark, South
Africa, Canada, and elsewhere. Everywhere it went, the format worked
wonders. So I began to test it out on another type of gathering: ones where
people did know one another, through work or family or otherwise. To my
surprise, it still worked. And after hosting many of these dinners, and seeing
groups of various kinds being authentic with one another in remarkable
ways, I began to detect certain patterns in what helped the real and the

revelatory to surface. In addition to setting the right environment (we
always try to do it in private spaces, with low lighting, flickering candles,
comforting food, and flowing wine), I have found there are certain
approaches the thoughtful gatherer can take to encourage people to jettison
the phony and the polished for the true.
SPROUT SPEECHES, NOT STUMP SPEECHES
One of these approaches is to seek out and design for what I call the
“sprout speech,” as distinguished from its tedious better-known cousin the
stump speech. The stump speech is the pre-planned, baked spiel that people
have given a thousand times. We all have stump speeches, and at many of
the more formal and important gatherings we attend, it is our stump
speeches that come out to play.
If the term “stump speech” evokes the strongest, most durable part of the
tree, the part that is firmly in the ground, the sprout is, by contrast, the
newest and weakest part of the tree. It is the part still forming. What I
learned from 15 Toasts is that while we tend to give stump speeches at so
many gatherings of consequence, it is people’s sprouts that are most
interesting—and perhaps most prone to making a group feel closely
connected enough to attempt big things together.
So much in our culture still tells us to present our stump speeches when
we are anywhere in the vicinity of opportunity, especially at something like
a conference. But I keep stumbling on interesting experiments doing just
the opposite, inviting people with impressive stump speeches to leave them
at home and bring their sprout speeches instead.
One of these more forward-thinking gatherings is called House of
Genius. (You may recall encountering it briefly in the chapter on pop-up
rules—and, yes, some of the more interesting gatherings of our time may
need better names.) House of Genius was founded by two entrepreneurs,
Toma Bedolla and Tim Williams. The pair had gotten tired of networking
events where everybody shared puffed-up sermons about what was working
with their companies or jobs and few people shared what wasn’t. They
decided to experiment with a new format of business get-together—a
format that would eventually be replicated around the world.

The format was this: A group of strangers would gather in a room. Two
or three of them would be entrepreneurs or other professionals with a
problem. To get into the room, they had to apply for the chance to present
their problem to the others. The others were people from varied fields who
had applied to volunteer their time to solve someone’s problem. A
moderator would guide and tightly orchestrate the proceedings.
In both House of Genius gatherings I attended, I was struck by the
moderators’ ability to get people to share their challenges openly with
strangers and to let the rest of us look under the hood. By inviting people to
share their problems, House of Genius elevates authenticity over selling.
They, too, have organized a gathering around our incomplete selves (and
companies).
Both events I saw took place in conference rooms in coworking spaces
in New York City. There was some time to mingle near the office kitchen
before the event formally began. As people walked in, we were encouraged
to meet one another but told that we couldn’t discuss anything related to
work. On one occasion, I started talking to a youngish man with blond hair
wearing cargo shorts, and we both immediately realized we had to stretch a
bit not to ask each other about work. We tried to chitchat. He asked whether
I had taken any vacations recently. I think I asked him whether he had any
pets. We both started laughing when we realized how bad we were at
talking to each other about topics other than work. A number of questions
kept accidentally bumping into the topic: “Have you been to one of these
before?” “Yes,” I said, “because I . . .” I stopped myself because I realized I
couldn’t tell him that I was studying gatherings, since it broke the no-work-
talk rule. “When did you move to New York?” I asked. “Five years ago.”
“What brought you here?” “Uh, I can’t tell you the real reason.” More
laughter. But we improved as the night progressed.
Later, I met the moderator for the evening. “Have you moderated
before?” I asked.
“Yes, a few times.”
“How did you get involved?”
“Um, we’ll leave that for later.”
“For the end?”
“For the Big Reveal.”
“Oh.”

Eventually a young woman, apparently the organizer, invited us to enter
the room and take our seats. “First names only,” we were reminded. As we
wandered in, we were asked to take a name tag, grab a seat, and not talk
about work. “You can talk about Disney World, but not work,” she said. We
started talking about Disney World. After the final stragglers came in, we
were officially constituted as a “House.”
The organizer welcomed us, gave us some background on the House of
Genius, and reminded us of the purpose of the gathering and the rules,
which were also posted on the wall. “Even in giving feedback, you can
offer suggestions, but please don’t talk about what you do,” she told us.
That evening there would be two presenters, and each would get a
roughly forty-five-minute session with the House. For the first five minutes,
each one would make a presentation to the room about a challenge. We
would then have two or three minutes to ask clarifying questions about the
challenge, and the entrepreneur would answer them. Then everyone would
have one minute to give their “first thoughts.” (You can ask questions
during this period, but the entrepreneur can’t answer them.) And the rest of
the time is a dialogue between the House and the entrepreneur. The
moderator makes sure that everyone has a chance to talk and guides us on
what makes good feedback: examples of past successes and failures,
contacts because “we want to extend tonight into the future,” and books and
articles. At the end of the evening, we would have the Reveal, in which we
would each share who we are and what we actually do for a living.
The first challenge-bearer was a woman running a social enterprise that
was trying to build more inclusive workplaces. She wanted our help
figuring out how to create true partnerships with employers and influence
them to “think outside the box” when hiring. The second was a young man
starting a travel app that would let people create and share their own guides
with a larger community. He wanted our ideas on how to cultivate “loyal
and rabidly engaged early users in this city with little budget and some
connections.”
In each of the conversations, I observed as the dozen or so of us began to
figure out how we could help. In both cases, we needed to know more about
each idea. But as we asked more questions, it made each entrepreneur more
vulnerable. They had to give us more information: “So how many
companies have you spoken with?” Not as many as they should have,
maybe. Or our suggestions created more work for them: “Have you thought

about partnering with job-training programs?” Or we pointed out their blind
spots: “I’m not sure if your basic assumptions about why companies aren’t
hiring these populations are right.” Yet if they could remain open to it, they
would receive valuable help from smart people.
It was an interesting dynamic, and the more we got into the weeds of
each company, the more I felt a desire to help these entrepreneurs. Had they
come up to me at a networking event and pitched their idea with the usual
puffiness, I may have been interested, but I doubt it would have tugged at
my heartstrings. But seeing them there in the hot seat, knowing they had
volunteered for this, to expose themselves and their ideas to strangers, made
me feel compassion for them and made me want to use my brain and
resources to push them forward. And in the rare moments when one of the
problem-bearers would get testy or defensive, or withhold information, it
was obvious to everyone, and it caused the helpers to pull back. It was like
watching a group dance in vulnerability. The more the entrepreneurs shared,
the more I could relate and the more I wanted to help. The stronger they
seemed, the less they needed me and the less I could connect with their
travails.
In some ways, this should be obvious. Being vulnerable with people
makes them feel for you. Scholars like Brené Brown have been telling us
this for years. But if it’s obvious as a description of human behavior, it
doesn’t seem obvious to most of our gatherers. A gatherer is bringing
people together. Sometimes, as at the House of Genius, the explicit goal is
for people to help one another. But every time people gather, they are being
brought into the opportunity to help one another, to do what they couldn’t
do or think up or heal alone. And yet so often when we gather, we are
gathered in ways that hide our need for help and portray us in the strongest
and least heart-stirring light. It is in gathering that we meet those who could
help us, and it is in gathering that we pretend not to need them, because we
have it all figured out.
A graduate school program I attended epitomized this paradox. At the
Harvard Kennedy School, legions of brilliant, passionate students arrived
with real questions and real fears and real wonderings about how to solve
the problems of the world. All too often, however, they ended up
intimidating rather than helping one another. In the classrooms where we
were supposed to learn what we didn’t already know, the culture taught us
to avoid sounding stupid in front of one another. It didn’t make sense to try

ideas out loud, because these were your potential future bosses and partners
and employees, and it was important to show your strength. In the early
days of the semester, when people asked, “How are you?” we answered
with smiling, and often false, positivity, falling into the terrible habits of
politicians on the campaign trail: Never voice the truth; always be
sparklingly upbeat. When we spoke of our pasts, we often spun like flacks
on Capitol Hill: The up-and-down facts of our lives were smoothed into
ascending narratives, our accomplishments were humble-bragged, and our
personal brands were promoted.
Lisa Lazarus, a student one year ahead of me, had the gall to suggest that
this was a lonely, miserable way to learn. She revolted by creating a small
group called CAN, or Change Agents Now. The idea was simple: groups of
six interested Kennedy School students would agree to meet every other
week, for 3 hours at a time, and do the opposite of what they were doing for
the other 333 hours of that fortnight. Against all odds, they—we—would be
honest.
We would skip over all the parts that were working and dive straight into
sharing what was not. We would tell authentic, painful stories—about
parents who had abandoned us, about bullies who had taunted us, about
poverty that had shamed us. We showed frailty, vulnerability, and fear; in
fact, in an inversion of Kennedy School norms, weakness became more
valued than strength.
We followed a loose curriculum that focused on sharing “crucible
moments,” a concept borrowed from Bill George, a professor of leadership
at Harvard Business School and the author of True North. Crucible
moments, according to George, are challenging moments in our lives that
shape us in some deep way and shift our lens on the world. They are stories
that define us in our own minds—and that, nevertheless, seldom come up in
the ordinary course of conversation.
My CAN group met every other Wednesday, and for our early meetings,
we shared our life stories, focusing primarily on these crucible moments.
We knew what we were signing up for, and we were curious about one
another. I didn’t know the students in my CAN group well, and the stories
they shared—about their own childhoods, difficult decisions they’d made,
relationships with their parents, hometowns, religious beliefs—made me
see them in an entirely new light. It also made me feel safe showing my
own different sides, sharing my own demons.

This series of gatherings, simple in their design, purposeful in their
conception, transformed my experience of graduate school. The school
became a different kind of place for me. Armor fell off; ears widened and
mouths shrank; we learned to love one another for our flaws. The navy
officer whose father was once homeless. The entrepreneur who grew up
poor. The executive director who, in light of an absent father, became a
second parent to her siblings. I began to see their behavior through a
different lens. And rather than feel jealous or intimidated by their
accomplishments, I began to feel empathy for them, because I understood
their stories, just as they understood mine. Experiencing a different way of
being in my CAN group led me to take similar risks with some of my peers
outside of the group.
Lazarus had an insight about her peers: that we all wear masks, and that
while masks have uses, taking them off can allow for deeper connection,
shared growth, and more fruitful collaboration. More than a decade after
she started it, Lazarus’s CAN group still meets.
NO IDEAS, PLEASE. WE’RE GATHERING
Another tactic that helps to undam realness in gatherings is a push for
people’s experiences over their ideas.
That evening in Abu Dhabi we had asked guests to give their toasts in
the form of a story, but we had done so mainly as a form of quality control.
We figured that anyone can tell a story from their life, and that such stories
might be better than riffs on a theme people hadn’t thought about. As it
turned out, though, the emphasis on stories did something else as well,
something we hadn’t necessarily planned: It helped us feel connected. And
it worked because we were explicit about it. We got stories because we
asked for stories—we made a clear distinction in the prompt between
people’s concrete experiences and their abstract ideas.
Many gatherings would be improved if people were simply asked for
their stories. And there are few institutions that have done more to
demonstrate the power of this principle than The Moth, a series of
gatherings that promote the idea and practice of storytelling as social glue.

The Moth was founded in the late 1990s by a Southerner named George
Dawes Green who had grown tired of poetry slams. A novelist himself, he
attended poetry slams to try to meet other writers and artists. But rather than
feeling transported by the poetry, he would leave feeling irritated. “I felt
something was wrong with them,” he told me. Every poem, he said, “was
told in this singsong voice. As soon as the poet stood up there, he’d begin to
speak in this poetic language, and this wall would come down.” That
barrier, in his view, came from a prevailing idea of the poet as an ethereal
and distant figure: “You were part of this deep tradition, and you gather
your ideas from some connection that you had with God or with the powers
of the universe. You were a shaman, and you were pulling this information
down, and through you would come this exalted language—an almost
nonhuman language.” This may sound great to you. But to Green, at least, it
was off-putting.
Despite his contempt for the slam scene, Green noticed when the poets
did wow him. It was often during the preamble, an unscripted backstory
poets would tell about the roots of their shamanic creation. “My grandpa
would go fishing upstate,” Green imagines one of the poets saying all these
years later. “I remember having to get up so early.” What struck him about
the language in the preambles was that it consisted of “perfectly natural
phrases,” Green said, “and the audience would immediately perk up and be
with the poet, because there was no longer a sense of artifice, a wall. And I
was always fascinated by that.” He started experimenting with a gathering
format designed exactly around that moment, and The Moth was born. Two
decades later, The Moth has ongoing programs in twenty-five cities and has
presented eighteen thousand stories, often to standing-room-only crowds.
I told him about my experiences running 15 Toasts and asked him why,
and when, he thought story works in a gathering.
“A moment a story works is usually a moment of vulnerability,” he said.
“You can’t tell a story that’s any good about how successful you are. Trump
tries to do that.” But when you touch this vulnerability, he said, “people feel
this utter comfort. I went through that. I know exactly what that person is
saying.” Green has spent years studying the art and craft of storytelling. He
explained some of the elements of a good story told simply:
Story is about a decision that you made. It’s not about what happens
to you. And if you hit that and you get your vulnerability and you

understand the stakes, and a few other things, people will intuitively
find great stories to tell, and as soon as they do, we know them. We
know them as human beings. This is no longer my boss’s colleague.
This is a real person who had heartbreak. Oh, I know that.
THE DARK THEME
If guests often bring their stump rather than sprout speeches to events, if
they often talk of their theories rather than their experiences, then
organizers can succumb to their own kind of phoniness. They insist on
keeping gatherings positive, especially when choosing themes. The
meaningful gatherer doesn’t fear negativity, though, and in fact creates
space for the dark and the dangerous.
If you recall that first 15 Toasts dinner, the theme we had chosen was
highly positive: “a good life.” Looking back, I don’t think it was a great
theme, and our guests evidently agreed. After all, it wasn’t just one person
who shifted the terms and tone of the conversation by bringing up death.
We hadn’t explicitly asked about death, nor did either of us introduce it
ourselves. But as we spoke of the joy of life, there seemed to be a need to
bring in the flip side of life. As we did, the conversation took on a new
depth. People began to lean in more, no doubt thinking of their own
mortality or that of those they loved. It made the evening richer and rawer.
As Leberecht and I began to spread 15 Toasts to other venues, we varied
the themes: 15 Toasts to the stranger, to faith, to happiness, to collateral
damage, to escapes, to borders, to Them, to fear, to risk, to rebellion, to
romance, to dignity, to the self, to education, to the story that changed my
life, to the end of work, to beauty, to conflict, to tinkering, to the truth, to
America, to local, to the fellow traveler, to origins, to the right problem, to
the disrupted, to the fourth industrial revolution, to courage, to borders, to
risk, and, yes, to vulnerability. What we came to find over time was that the
best themes were not the sweet ones, like happiness or romance, but rather
the ones that had darker sides to them: fear, Them, borders, strangers. The
ones that allowed for many interpretations. The ones that let people show
sides of themselves that were weak, that were confused and unprocessed,
that were morally complicated.

Sadly, themes like these are exiled from so many of our gatherings. Far
too many of them, especially more professionally oriented ones, are run on
a cult of positivity. Everything has to be about what’s going well, about
collaboration, about hope and the future. There is no space for what our
guests were telling us they wanted at the dinners: a chance to pause and
consider what is not uplifting but thought- and heart-provoking.
When I push this idea of darkening the theme on clients and friends,
they often resist more fiercely than they do with most of my advice. So I am
resorting to extreme measures to convince them, and you, of why it isn’t
just acceptable but also essential to create a space in your gatherings for the
darkness to come in: I am outsourcing the job to a dominatrix.
I originally learned of Stefanie Zoe Warncke from a German DJ. He
suggested that I meet a dominatrix he knew, as she was an expert in creating
environments and scenes. I imagined some covert meeting at night in a
parking lot. Much to my relief (or maybe dismay?), we ended up meeting
for tea at a French patisserie in New York City.
Warncke, who goes by Zoe, trained as a lawyer and for years worked as
a partner at a firm in Düsseldorf by day and as a dominatrix at one of the
larger dungeons in Europe by night. She eventually left Germany and the
law and moved to New York, where she still practices as a dominatrix. She
sees her job as helping clients explore their darker fantasies in a safe space.
“I want to help people explore parts of themselves in a safe way,” she
told me. She said her interest in the work probably traced back to her own
family environment growing up, a place where she “wasn’t allowed to
explore parts” of herself.
Why, I asked, was it important for people to probe their darkness? “I
think it makes the world a better place,” she said with a laugh. That
sounded too simplistic. Why did letting people be dark make the world a
better place?
She thought for a moment. “Because I think if they know who they
really are, they don’t have to compensate with anger or self-hatred or all
those things,” she said.
Warncke was touching on a concept that psychologists call the
“integration of the shadow.” I contacted Dr. David M. Ortmann, a
psychotherapist and the coauthor of Sexual Outsiders: Understanding
BDSM Sexualities and Communities. I described Warncke’s work to him
and asked him about it. He explained in an email that “integration of the

shadow” is “a Jungian term that identifies that we all have shadow material
(aggression, violence, nonconsensual fantasies, etc.). Disowning these parts
of ourselves is not an effective way to deal with them, as what is disowned
or ignored tends to grow (and often grow unconsciously). BDSM offers a
way for shadow material to be integrated consciously.” Of Warncke in
particular, he offered: “I would say your dominatrix friend knows her work
very well and would go further to say that she’s doing something
therapeutic.”
At this point, you may be wondering what a dominatrix has to do with
your next staff meeting or family reunion. I’m not suggesting you hire
Warncke, but rather you heed Warncke. What she does in concentration you
can do with an appropriate level of dilution in your gathering. The lesson
she offers is that darkness is better inside the tent than outside of it. We all
have it. It’s going to be at your gathering. And if you bar it from the formal
proceedings, it doesn’t disappear. It shows up in ways that do your
gatherings no favors.
THE STRANGER SPIRIT
One of the more improbable secrets of unleashing honesty and
vulnerability in a gathering is raising the stranger quotient. Though it seems
counterintuitive, it is often easier to get people to share when many in the
room are unknown to them—or when they are helped to see those they do
know with fresh eyes.
After one 15 Toasts dinner in New York, a guest was upset that a close
friend of hers, whom she had brought to the gathering, had spoken openly
of his depression. She pulled me aside afterward, feeling confused and
betrayed that he would share with several strangers something he had never
told her. Yet the man was making the same choice that many of us do in
similar situations. It is often easier to confess parts of our lives with
strangers, who have no stake in our lives, than with intimates who do.
The power of the stranger lies in what they bring out in us. With
strangers, there is a temporary reordering of a balancing act that each of us
is constantly attempting: between our past selves and our future selves,
between who we have been and who we are becoming. Your friends and

family know who you have been, and they often make it harder to try out
who you might become. But you’re not the singing type! Why would you
want to be a doctor when you hated biology in school? I guess I just don’t
see you doing stand-up. Strangers, unconnected to our pasts and, in most
cases, to our futures, are easier to experiment around. They create a
temporary freedom to pilot-test what we might become, however untethered
that identity is to what we have been. They allow us to try out new sides. In
front of a stranger, we are free to choose what we want to show, hide, or
even invent.
Some extreme gatherers so believe in this stranger spirit that they
organize gatherings entirely for and of strangers—like the seventy-sixth
birthday celebration of the Oxford professor Theodore Zeldin. Zeldin—a
renowned historian of France and a famed philosopher, with a wild white
mane—decided that year that he would hold a birthday party for people he
didn’t know. He issued a public invitation through the BBC for everyone
who was interested to join him in Regent’s Park in London at a particular
date and time, and to celebrate his birthday by talking to someone they
didn’t know.
Hundreds of people showed up. Each of them was tasked with having a
one-on-one conversation with a stranger. In lieu of food, at each setting was
a Zeldin invention called the “Conversation Menu” that led the pairs
through six “courses” of talk. Under the heading of “Starters” were
questions like “How have your priorities changed over the years?” and
“How have your background and experience limited or favoured you?”
Under “Soups” was an invitation to ask, “Which parts of your life have
been a waste of time?” Under “Fish”: “What have you rebelled against in
the past and what are you rebelling against now?” Under “Salads”: “What
are the limits of your compassion?”
FRESH EYES
The reality is, you don’t have to invite the entire United Kingdom to
your birthday party to raise the stranger quotient among your guests. If you
host consciously, you can bring the stranger spirit to a gathering of people
familiar with one another. When I have tried to do this with family dinners

and team get-togethers, I have found that choosing the right question and
structure can help people long acquainted see one another with fresh eyes.
A few years ago, my husband and I were going to India to visit our
grandparents and extended family. We decided to gather both sides of our
family for a dinner. There would be seventeen of us in total. Being well
acquainted with large family dinners, I knew that if we didn’t do anything
to design the evening, cousins would gravitate to their own cousins,
grandparents would talk among themselves, and most of the conversation
would be small talk. We would eat, drink, get sleepy, and call it a night. Not
necessarily a bad evening, but we wanted to make it special.
We decided to borrow from the 15 Toasts model, but with some changes.
Because there were multiple members of our families who had no problem
singing in public, we scrapped the singing rule and instead had each toaster
choose the next toaster. Borrowing from my CAN group’s use of “crucible
moments,” we asked the group to share a story, a moment, or an experience
from their life that “changed the way you view the world.” Then we added
the clincher: It had to be a story that no one else at the gathering knew. This
was, in a sense, a rather wild requirement for a gathering of family
members in a tight-knit society in which relatives are a bigger part of life
than friends. But we thought it might give the dinner a shot at getting
people who thought they knew everything about one another to see one
another with fresh eyes.
A cousin began by saying something like “The birth of my children.”
But now the group, having already absorbed the rules and their purpose,
immediately protested: We already know that! That false start and
correction laid the groundwork for the others. People began to share stories
that even their nearest and dearest had never heard before. Even if one or
two people present did know a particular story, it was told that night in a
way that revealed impacts or implications that no one had known. One aunt,
a geneticist, spoke of being told as a teenager that she couldn’t be a doctor
because she was a woman. It shocked her into studying harder. Another
aunt, a civil servant, talked about passing the Indian Administrative Service
test, completing officer training, only to be put in a district magistrate’s
office for months on end, never being let into the field. She finally went out
on her own in a truck one day because she couldn’t understand why they
weren’t letting her do her rounds, and a local government official told her

that she would always be treated differently, no matter how smart she was,
because she was a woman.
As the toasts went on, I began to realize that something remarkable was
happening. Our original goal had been to get our relatives to continue the
weaving of families that had begun with our wedding. But now something
even more interesting was going on: Fathers and mothers and sons and
nieces were learning about their own family members in ways they’d never
expected. When a family elder, now in his nineties, shared his story, he
recalled a time fifty years prior when he was working at a large company
and realized that the advertisement reels he was sending out to movie
theaters were often not making it there or, if they were, not being played.
He told us how he solved the problem. Suddenly, in this aging man who
often stays quiet, in part because he is hard of hearing, the table saw a
young, sprightly, inventive businessman. My grandmother, shy to speak in
English, asked me to share her story, which I had learned only a few days
earlier. It was the story of how she became one of the first women in her
caste in the conservative city of Varanasi to attend Banaras Hindu
University. She was the eldest of seven children, and her father adored her.
He told her to go register for university and begin attending classes. Then
he left town for a relative’s wedding on her first day of school. When his
neighbors complained that he was letting his daughter attend university and
violating gender norms, he wasn’t there to hear the complaints. When he
returned, she was well into her classes, and he asked the same neighbors if
they really wanted him to pull her out of school. Even if it was wrong for
her to have started, should education ever be interrupted? The moment
changed her perception of her father and educated her in how change
happens (slowly and with people in privilege as protectors).
What was striking about the evening was everyone’s willingness to
embrace it. And to try something new. We began to see parts of one another
with fresh eyes. A grandmother as a daredevil college student. A
grandfather as an innovative young executive. Aunts, who in Indian family
gatherings are often relegated to the role of silent nurturers, as pioneers in
their fields. It reminded me of how much there was left to know about
people I thought I knew well. We weren’t “strangers” by any stretch, but we
found a way to design for the stranger spirit.

THE INVITATION MATTERS
If you want to try this type of gathering, centered on people’s real selves
rather than their best selves, you need to warn them. One of the insights we
learned from 15 Toasts is that, in keeping with my approach to openings,
you should tell people as explicitly as possible and at the beginning what
you want in the room and what you want to be left at the door.
When I host 15 Toasts on the sidelines of a conference or another high-
powered gathering, I tend to say in my welcome words that there is a
typical dynamic to such events that we are hoping to avoid—the dynamic of
showiness and puffery. Given our desire to counteract that, I invite people
to leave outside the door those parts of their lives and work that are going
great. We’re interested in the half-baked parts. We’re interested in the parts
they’re still figuring out. We’re not interested in their preplanned speeches
but rather in the words and thoughts still forming.
In the very different situation of the 15 Toasts format applied to family
gatherings, a different kind of invitation was required. Normally at such
dinners, no one reveals anything fresh or surprising. If we wanted to change
up the kind of family dinner we were having, it required guiding people. So
I told them to leave their familiar stories about themselves at the door and
bring into the room those parts of themselves that might surprise even their
kids.
When I work with business teams and do a 15 Toasts before a big
meeting, there is another set of problematic dynamics to fend off. Teams
often interact in well-worn ways, with the same people playing the same
roles. So in my welcome I name that and tell the group that the whole point
of this dinner is to try out another way of being together, to create space for
everyone to show different sides of themselves and play different roles. By
naming the way I anticipate they will be, and asking them to set that aside
and try something else, I often get through to them. Often, but not always.
This cueing of people in the welcome doesn’t have to be elaborate. Just
a strong and suggestive hint. At the first 15 Toasts dinner, I said something
about how we hoped the evening would feel more like a wedding than a
conference. Someone joked, “Who’s getting married?” Another guest said,
“We’ll vote at the end of the night!” People laughed, and I knew the night
was taking off.

At each 15 Toasts since, I almost always say something like “Tell us
something that would surprise us,” or “Leave your successes at the door,”
or “There’s no need to slip in an accomplishment.”
I have also found that this leaving of things at the door is easier when
people are seen for their virtues. People are still people, and, particularly in
professional contexts, no one wants to look weak. But I have discovered
that if I, the host, acknowledge and broadcast their strength, as individuals
and collectively well in advance, it relieves some of the pressure people feel
to flex during the event itself. I say something up front like “You’re all here
because you’re remarkable.” I acknowledge their remarkableness and then I
add, “That said, we don’t want to hear about your résumé or how great you
are. We already know that.”
HOST, REVEAL THYSELF
It isn’t enough to signal what you want and don’t want from your guests
when it comes to sharing more honestly and authentically. Early in the
gathering, you, the host, need to go there yourself. You need to show them
how.
If you are hoping to help your guests be more real, you need to be real
yourself. When I host these dinners, I make sure that every toaster has my
full attention throughout the dinner. I listen deeply and show the kind of self
that I am asking them to show me.
This is what I was doing when I spoke about my period party. In
contexts in which I am at a disadvantage, I typically try to tell stories
against type. I could emphasize other details about me so as to be taken
seriously: studying at an engineering school or not knowing how to cook.
Why on earth would I tell a story not only from when I was eleven years
old but also about getting my period? Because few stories could have more
clearly communicated to my guests that I was willing to be genuine and to
connect with them—and that they might do the same.
The period story sort of just came to me, but a Dutch colleague of mine,
Bernardus Holtrop, actually follows a principle about sharing in this way. I
saw it in action when he and I (and many others) co-facilitated a meeting of
a few hundred business leaders who had come together to create trusted

circles of support with one another. Holtrop shared one of his pro-tips with
us: To get the group to be vulnerable, he said, we facilitators needed to
share an even more personal story than we expected our clients to. We
would set the depth of the group by whatever level we were willing to go
to; however much we shared, they would share a little less. We had to
become, in effect, participants.
RISK MANAGEMENT
When you’re asking people to go deeper, to share what they don’t
usually share, you must manage the risk-taking you are encouraging.
Sometimes that means prodding people to take more risk; other times, it
means soothing people afraid of taking risk.
The singing rule we established with 15 Toasts was a way of nudging
people toward risk-taking. By creating a risk in not coming forward with a
toast, we evened out the risk calculus. People had to decide which was
worse: giving a toast early or singing. The singing rule also creates some
playful drama toward the end of the night, when all of a sudden three or
four people, realizing the risk of having to sing, start clinking their glasses
desperately after each toast, making sure they are not last.
It is also important as a host to be attentive to the needs of different
personalities. No one, however extroverted, wants to feel like they have no
choice but to share a deeply personal story. One of the reasons choosing a
general theme works so well is because there is a lot of freedom within that
theme to choose the level of depth one wants to take. While we do ask that
everyone present participate, we let people decide what and how much they
want to share. And this level of choice is the difference between people
being game for the evening and people resenting it.
Leng Lim, a fellow facilitator and an Episcopalian minister, uses the
analogy of a swimming pool to talk about people’s different comfort levels.
He hosts a range of gatherings, some at business schools, some at his farm,
and he told me that he invites intimacy in all of them. But he is explicit
about letting every participant choose their desired level of depth.
“I draw a swimming pool,” he said. “There is a deep end and a shallow
end. You can choose whatever end you want to enter. If you want to tell us

your deepest secrets, you can. Or you can be superficial, and getting wet
means being real, so bring something that is real for you.” It is important,
Lim said, to offer an “invitation to intimacy, but depth is a complete
choice.” Allowing each person to choose what and how much they want to
expose was vital to making 15 Toasts intimate without being pushy.

E
Seven
Cause Good Controversy
•       •       •
nough about warmth. Let’s talk about heat.
I am often called in by gatherers who are looking for greater
authenticity, but who are more interested in spice and heat than
warmth and fuzziness. The skilled gatherer knows not only how to make
people share and connect, but also how to make things fruitfully
controversial.
While the last chapter was about bringing people closer together through
what they share in common, this chapter is about making good use of what
divides us in our gatherings. It is about how to turn up the heat. My belief is
that controversy—of the right kind, and in the hands of a good host—can
add both energy and life to your gatherings as well as be clarifying. It can
help you use gatherings to answer big questions: what you want to do, what
you stand for, who you are. Good controversy can make a gathering matter.
DO NOT NOT TALK ABOUT SEX, POLITICS, AND
RELIGION
You may have grown up, as I did, hearing the adage to avoid talk of sex,
politics, and religion at your gatherings. This commandment to avoid the
dangerously interesting is widespread. Personally, I believe that few things
are as responsible for the mediocrity and dullness of so many gatherings as
this epically bad advice.

The impulse not to make waves is as old as humanity, and formal
injunctions against letting controversy into one’s gatherings date back at
least to 1723. At the time, the Freemasons were a burgeoning secret society,
and one of their members, the Reverend James Anderson, drafted the first
constitution for the Premier Grand Lodge of England. This document
explicitly forbade “doing or saying anything offensive, or that may forbid
an easy and free Conversation, for that would blast our Harmony, and
defeat our laudable Purposes.” The Freemasons had taken up and promoted
an idea that would become an erroneous touchstone for gatherers: that the
airing of differences can do no good, that harmony is made never to be
broken.
More than 150 years later, in 1880, Thomas Edie Hill showed the
continued vitality of this thinking with advice printed in his book Hill’s
Manual of Social and Business Forms: “Do not discuss politics or religion
in general company. You probably would not convert your opponent, and he
will not convert you. To discuss those topics is to arouse feeling without
any good result.” In 1922, Emily Post, in her book Etiquette, gave the
advice her own twist, counseling the avoidance of all negativity. “Talk
about things which you think will be agreeable to your hearer,” she wrote.
“Don’t dilate on ills, misfortune, or other unpleasantnesses. The one in
greatest danger of making enemies is the man or woman of brilliant wit.”
And you wonder why so many gatherings are time-wasting and yawn-
inducing.
The advice continues into today, thriving in the media and online
people-to-people advice forums. On a Quora thread titled “Why is it
considered rude to discuss sex, politics, and religion?” a woman who claims
to have read etiquette guides “since age 6” wrote: “The goal of etiquette is
to make people feel welcome and comfortable. So why look for fights?” An
essay on the career website Glassdoor warns of the politics-sex-religion
unholy trinity: “Before you make the potentially career-endangering
mistake, here is why you should stay away from all three topics in the
workplace.”
The funny thing about this advice is that it is followed nowadays even
by people who do not think they are following it. Many gatherers obey its
spirit even if they do not agree with the letter, making choices that elevate
harmony in gathering over controversy. Universities whose founding
purpose was dispute and argument now regularly rescind invitations to

speakers whom some students deem too controversial and out of line.
Condoleezza Rice, who served as secretary of state under George W. Bush,
had to withdraw from giving the commencement speech at Rutgers
University because of student protest, as did Christine Lagarde, who runs
the International Monetary Fund, from an address to Smith College.
Michelle Obama, the former first lady, eloquently weighed in and
encouraged students to “run to, and not away from, the noise.” (Presumably,
not the kind of noise that was generated at Middlebury College when the
sociologist Charles Murray came to speak and students physically barred
him from entering the building to which he had been invited, injuring his
host, a female professor, in the process.)
It’s not only campuses. Virtually every conference or industry gathering
I have attended features panels, and virtually every panel I have ever seen is
dull. The people who pick the panel topics pick the blandest ideas they can
find—something about collaboration or partnership, prosperity or building
bridges, new horizons or growth. In this they follow the Freemasons’
mantra of avoiding what would “blast our Harmony.” When they select
moderators, they seem to pick people trained in the Emily Post tradition of
smoothing things over and preventing the eruption of “unpleasantnesses.”
When was the last time you heard a panel moderator ask a tough question
instead of tossing softballs? When was the last time you saw a couple of
panelists truly argue about something worth arguing about? The panel, like
the university, is a venue that prides itself on being about debate, when in
fact it has given in to the dogma that controversy must be avoided at any
cost.
When I work with clients, they often tell me they want to do a “town
hall” to air opinions and get people to speak their truth. Then the day
comes, and if I haven’t managed to wrest control over the event, the town
hall is used to recirculate the old platitudes, to reassure those in charge
about the wisdom of their rule, to keep everything exactly as it is. When I
challenge the organizers, they often tell me that it’s too risky to introduce
controversy in a group setting.
So how do we create gatherings that can hold some heat without burning
up in flames? How do we cause, and have the group benefit from, good
controversy?

CAGE MATCHES AREN’T JUST FOR WRESTLERS
Sometimes, the elevation of harmony over everything else merely makes
a gathering dull. Often, though, it is worse than that: The goal of harmony
burrows its way into the core of the gathering and becomes a kind of
pretender purpose, hampering the very thing the gathering was supposed to
be about. That was what happened at a very polite architecture firm I
worked with.
“Priya, we need more heat,” my client whispered nervously in my ear.
He was watching what had been planned and billed as a contentious
conversation about the future of his firm slip into a polite, cheerful
discussion. I was facilitating a gathering for a team of architects to think
about their firm’s long-term vision. We had spent the morning imagining
radical future scenarios, like a world where no new buildings were needed,
or one in which their largest client was the Catholic Church, or one in
which they had become a subscription service. These provocative prompts
were purposefully designed to create a conversation that got to the heart of
the question they were debating: Did they want to remain a bricks-and-
mortar architecture firm, or did they want to morph into an experience-
design firm?
There was serious disagreement in the room on that question, which is
why they asked me to orchestrate the gathering. But as the conversation got
under way, you wouldn’t know it. Everyone around the table was smiling,
friendly, and polite. Each time a partner would go out on a limb and dip a
toe into the underlying controversy, she would quickly withdraw.
I tried to redirect the group to what divided rather than united them.
“Let’s get back to Anne’s point,” I’d suggest. But they were a sophisticated
group and were well practiced at what I realized was one of the firm’s
dominant norms: avoiding anything that could stir the pot. The emotions I
knew to be in the room were not surfacing. I knew that I would soon have
to try a new approach, lest the whole meeting come to nothing.
So with the help of my extremely open-minded client, an executive who
was not an architect himself but worked for them, we began to scheme at
lunch, while everyone was away. In their absence, he and I restructured the
room, gathered some towels, and located some Rocky music on YouTube.
We were preparing for a cage match.

When the architects returned, they found two giant posters. One extolled
a character called the Brain, the other a character called the Body. Each
poster featured an actual wrestler’s body, onto which one of the architects’
heads had been hastily photoshopped. We had chosen two architects we
knew to be charismatic, playful, and eloquent. Both of them immediately
erupted in laughter when they saw what we had put up. We built on their
surprise and didn’t give them much of a chance to think.
I jumped into the middle of the crowd and announced that there was
now going to be a cage match. I laid out the rules: In Round 1, each
wrestler would be given three minutes to make the strongest argument for
his side. The Body would have to argue why the firm should absolutely
remain focused on the physical, on bricks-and-mortar architecture, on
building buildings, for the next hundred years. The Brain would have to
make the case for becoming a design firm, an increasingly popular if
ethereal creature that took on jobs like crafting the signage within a hospital
or organizing the flow of processes in an airport but didn’t necessarily build
things. It was a choice between moving with the times and sticking to their
core talent.
I wasn’t sure if people would go for it, and I could see the architects
trying to figure out whether their colleagues were going to engage or not. I
kept my own energy up and my voice confident, trying to push past their
hesitancy.
Each “wrestler” was then assigned a coach, who was a member of the
organizing team, and given a small white towel. Each coach stood behind
his or her player and started massaging shoulders and whispering advice.
Both men started rolling their heads around as if they were actually
preparing for a fight. Nobody knew yet what exactly we meant by a “cage
match.” Were they actually going to physically fight? What the hell was
going on?
I now told the rest of the group their role. They would have to listen to
each fighter’s argument and choose the side they were most convinced by.
Then I added the most important rule for the audience: They could not stay
neutral; they had to pick a wrestler to back. After every round, there would
be a five-minute period in which the wrestlers could receive advice on their
next round of argument. In Round 2, each wrestler would have another
three minutes to make the next iteration of his case.

I egged the crowd on to make some noise—cheering and jeering were
encouraged—to help the wrestlers feel the crowd’s support. Once Round 2
was complete, the crowd would have the chance to make their final,
updated decision on whom to stand behind. Everyone must choose a side, I
repeated, because I knew this group had a tendency to blur distinctions. In
the end, three independent judges (the executive assistants, who were in the
room for administrative support), would make the final call on who won
this Rumble in the Architecture Jungle.
Everyone began to talk excitedly among themselves. When we put the
Rocky song on, people started to laugh, and the Body stood up and started
gesticulating toward the Brain, playfully jeering at him. We were off. For
the next twenty minutes, thanks to the willingness of the two wrestler-
architects, this stuffy, buttoned-up, conservative, genteel group barked,
hissed, laughed, taunted, and listened as two architects made two strong,
interesting, sharp, and radically different cases for two very different
futures. When certain architects were waffling, trying to claim a spot
between the two fighters, it was their previously polite peers who called
them out: “You have to choose!” The match was confrontational, heated,
and argumentative, and it was exactly what we needed.
If you must know, the Body won.
The group was suffering from what many of us suffer from: a well-
meaning desire not to offend that devolves into a habit of saying nothing
that matters. They were not getting ideas out into the open. Because of this,
they couldn’t have a rich and honest dialogue, air their very real differences,
and make an important decision together that they would stand by. And by
avoiding what truly mattered to them in the name of not ruffling feathers,
they were evading the questions they most cared about answering. They
were kicking down the road the issue of their own future, as individuals and
as a firm.
In so many gatherings, we are so afraid of getting burned that we avoid
heat altogether. There is always risk inherent in controversy, because things
can go very wrong very quickly. But in avoiding it, we waste countless
opportunities to truly connect with others about the things they care about.
The responsible harnessing of good controversy—handling with structure
and care what we normally avoid—is one of the most difficult, complicated,
and important duties for a gatherer. When it is done well, it is also one of
the most transformative.

GOOD CONTROVERSY DOESN’T JUST HAPPEN
What, you might ask, is “good controversy”?
Good controversy is the kind of contention that helps people look more
closely at what they care about, when there is danger but also real benefit in
doing so. To embrace good controversy is to embrace the idea that harmony
is not necessarily the highest, and certainly not the only, value in a
gathering. Good controversy helps us re-examine what we hold dear: our
values, priorities, nonnegotiables. Good controversy is generative rather
than preservationist. It leads to something better than the status quo. It helps
communities move forward in their thinking. It helps us grow. Good
controversy can be messy in the midst of the brawling. But when it works,
it is clarifying and cleansing—and a forceful antidote to bullshit.
In my experience, though, good controversy rarely happens on its own.
It needs to be designed for and given structure. Because, almost by
definition, controversy arises from what people care enough about to argue
over, most gatherings are marred either by unhealthy peace or by unhealthy
heat. Either no one is really saying anything that they actually think, or you
end up with what I call the “Thanksgiving problem”: a total free-for-all of
pent-up grievances that often brings out tears and a screaming match,
culminating in your cousin’s announcement that he will be attending his
“Friendsgiving” back home from now on. Good controversy is much more
likely to happen when it is invited in but carefully structured.
One way to achieve that structuring at your gathering is to do what we
did with the cage match: We moved the controversy from implicit to
explicit by ritualizing it. We created a temporary alternative world within
the larger gathering, a wrestling match that allowed the controversy to be
litigated in a way that was honest and aired feelings without being bridge-
burning. We borrowed from an earlier chapter’s idea of pop-up rules, and
made the whole thing playful. The purpose of a cage match is, after all, to
fight. If there was no way they would debate within the context and norms
of their everyday collegiality, we had to change that context and those
norms temporarily. To do that safely, we turned to ritual.
This is what the organization DoSomething.org does when it hosts its
annual Social Good cage fight. (Promotional poster: “Watch industry
leaders duke it out on some of the sauciest topics in the nonprofit sector
like: One organization can’t claim to own an entire movement—

Volunteering abroad perpetuates the white savior complex—Social Media
campaigns are just another form of slacktivism—‘Raising awareness’
doesn’t do sh*t.”) They take topics that are taboo within the “social good”
field and move them front and center for the audience (and speakers) to
examine openly.
Many societies have their own versions of cage matches, using ritual to
carve out a space for conflict and controversy (and therefore removing
conflict and controversy from other spaces). Every year in Chumbivilcas
Province, Peru, villagers mark Christmas—the birthday of the Prince of
Peace—by gathering to beat one another up. In this region, which lacks a
reliable judiciary, the fighting has evolved as a way of airing and resolving
disputes before the year flickers out. In Chumbivilcas, January must begin
with a clean slate. In the South African village of Tshifudi, Venda men
gather regularly for a wrestling tradition called musangwe, where they fight
in part to sort out and relieve the tension around lingering disputes.
Tshilidzi Ndevana, a fifty-six-year-old teacher and father who is also the
president of musangwe and goes by the wrestling name Poison, told The
New York Times: “If there is a problem in the community, if people are
fighting, we tell them: ‘Wait. Don’t quarrel. We will bring it to musangwe
and sort it out there.’”
The cult film Fight Club captures the generalized feeling among
thirtysomething men in America in the late 1990s that they were losing
their masculinity. Fight Club depicts a Saturday-night ritual: an
underground gathering that serves as a release for these men. It’s a
gathering where they don’t have to “be a slave to the IKEA nesting
instinct,” as one character puts it. Fight Club is an embodiment of all that
modern men are not supposed to do during their day jobs and home lives:
fight, be aggressive, feel pain, cause pain. Fight Club borrows from an age-
old idea of dealing with the more dangerous aspects of ourselves by
separating them from everyday life and creating a space to safely release
that darker energy. And in each of these varied forms of fight clubs, there
are strict rules and practices and rituals, with a beginning, a middle, and an
end. Yes, these are physical fight clubs, but they’re doing what our little
cage match was trying to do: bringing conflict out into the open, in a safe,
regulated, constructive way.
As you think about your own gatherings, ritualized controversy may
sometimes make sense. I will be the first one to tell you it is not for every

event. In many cases, doing something out of the ordinary isn’t a great idea.
Sometimes the key to safely bringing in generous heat is to identify the hot
spots in a group and then simply organize the conversation around them,
protected by some ground rules. This was my approach to a gathering I
facilitated among a dozen or so leaders working on one of the most
politically divisive issues of our time.
HEAT MAPS, SAFE SPACES, AND GROUND RULES
I received a phone call out of the blue one day, asking if I would
facilitate a meeting in the U.K. that no one wanted to attend. It was a
gathering of a dozen major civic leaders in Europe, all of whom worked on
the same hot-button issue, but from radically different angles. The leaders
were, technically, on the same side of the issue, but they had among
themselves a long, complicated history and a lot of internal politics. They
were being convened to reflect on a global project they had collaborated on,
which was largely seen as a bust. But no one, I was told, was willing to
admit it was a bust, at least not to one another. I had three weeks to figure
out how to run the meeting.
The organizers were ambivalent as to whether it would be better to be
polite and go through the motions of feigning agreement, or whether they
should take off the lid and try to sort out some of the deeper contentious
issues—both interpersonal and strategic. On the one hand, they figured it
might be better to pretend everything is fine to keep the coalition together.
On the other hand, they hadn’t been particularly successful in achieving
their overall mission, and maybe it was time to let things hang out. I was
new to this domain and didn’t know the players. So I began where I begin
any attempt to cause good controversy: I made a heat map.
In almost any group of people—including strangers—certain areas of
conversation will generate more heat than others. This heat can arise from
conflict, taboos, transgression, power differences, hypocrisy, identity
clashes, etc. Part of my job is to figure out the sources of potential heat and
then decide what to do with them. In a church, a source of heat may be the
issue of gay marriage within the congregation, but it could also be how
tithes and collections are spent. In a newsroom, the heat may come from

what stories get best placement on the front page and on the paper’s
website, but it could also be about expected layoffs that have yet to be
announced. In a university administration, a source of heat may be the
treatment of legacy applicants or the renaming of buildings. Issues have
heat when they affect or threaten people’s fears, needs, and sense of self.
And when they poke at a source of power. Touching on these elements with
care can produce transformative gatherings, because you can dig below the
typical conversation into the bedrock of values.
To address these areas of heat, you need to know where they are. Thus
you make a heat map. You can do this by asking yourself (and others) the
following questions: What are people avoiding that they don’t think they’re
avoiding? What are the sacred cows here? What goes unsaid? What are we
trying to protect? And why?
In the case of the architecture firm, I had learned through a number of
one-on-one interviews and conversations ahead of the gathering that the
heat they most needed to face was around their identity: Who did they want
to be in the future? In the case of this political meeting, I set out to do the
same. What were their hot spots, and which of those were worth broaching?
I got to work.
I first interviewed every leader by phone. I tried to build trust and a
rapport with each of them, and I dug into their sense of what was not
working and what they thought the core issues were. Two ideas emerged:
First, a fundamental disagreement about whether the core problem was
within the cause itself, among the players who would be at the gathering, or
between the cause as a whole and those who opposed the cause. Second,
there was a massive power imbalance because of differences in size,
resources, and public recognition among the partners’ organizations that
affected all of their interactions.
Not surprisingly, the organizations with less influence were more upset
about how things were going than the organizations with more influence.
But almost all this dissatisfaction was coming out in proxy wars: battles
over language on pamphlets, over the sharing of data, over who gets to
stand on a dais or which country’s newspapers to publish in. Yet because
each of these seemingly small group decisions symbolized larger issues for
many in the group, they mattered.
After these initial phone calls, I created a digital workbook in which I
asked questions to continue the process of naming what participants

believed were the core issues. I asked them all to fill out the workbook
ahead of time and return it to me, and told them that their answers would be
read aloud in the room, anonymously. Unlike the phone calls, which were
confidential, they were now answering these questions knowing that they
would be shared, if untraceably. By making this transition, I introduced the
next level of risk into the process. The workbook included prompts about
participants’ personal history, to get them to connect back to their own core
values: “Tell me about a moment in your early life that deeply influenced
you and, in some way perhaps, led you to the work you do today.” But the
majority of the questions encouraged the leaders to speak about what wasn’t
working: “If you were to say something that was politically incorrect, or
taboo, about this process or project, what would it be?” It asked: “What do
you think is the most needed conversation for this group to have now?”
They each took the time to fill out the workbook and, fortunately, they
were open and honest. I had what I needed to bring their voices and
concerns into the room and host a conversation, not a cage match, that I
hoped would nurture good controversy.
Me being me, I insisted that we first do a dinner the night before. I
didn’t want to walk into this meeting and dive into the controversy. I
wanted to warm them up. We hosted a 15 Toasts dinner with the leaders and
chose the theme of conflict. I wanted to normalize the word and show that
there was some light in it. At first, people seemed confused by the theme,
but before too long the toasts started rolling in. (A lot of people did not
want to sing.) The toasts progressed through the night, and what they began
to demonstrate was that there are all kinds of conflicts: within families and
between friends, though the one that most resonated with people was of a
different kind: inner conflict. A number of toasts exposed sides of these
leaders that we hadn’t known before. That was a vital lesson. More
important for the next day’s gathering, it was a reminder that they were
complicated, multifaceted people who didn’t have everything worked out.
And that good conflict could lead them somewhere new.
The day of the gathering, I decided I would frame the entire day as a
one-group conversation. It was rare for all these busy leaders to be in the
same region, let alone one room, and part of their dynamic was that their
most honest conversations as a group tended to be offline or in sidebars. I
wanted to see if they could build the muscle to talk openly and rigorously
about what was facing them.

To do this, I began the day by setting ground rules. I asked the following
questions:
What do you need to feel safe here?
What do you need from this group to be willing to take a risk in this
conversation today?
Spending the time asking such questions helps further prime your guests
to take chances in the conversation and to listen more deeply than they
otherwise might. Getting them to participate in creating the rules, as
opposed to just presenting the rules myself, is also a way to begin naming
and acknowledging past behaviors at some of their meetings that served to
shut people down—behaviors now inspiring the suggestion of new rules to
foster new behaviors. It also lends a legitimacy to the rules. It lets the
facilitator say: “These are the rules you said you wanted.”
After creating those ground rules, I engaged in my second act of
naming: I began by reading aloud from the workbooks. I had organized my
excerpts by question and theme and anonymized them as thoroughly as I
could. I began reading out people’s personal stories. As often happens,
many of the participants had shared powerful stories from early in their
lives that the others had never heard. These stories reminded all of us of the
feeling with which we had left the previous night’s dinner. It helped draw a
thread back to that sensation. Though they had answered a range of
questions, I spent a disproportionate amount of time reading their answers
on the questions about taboos. I had given each participant a Post-it pad and
pen and asked them to capture any words and phrases they heard that struck
them. As I spoke, I noticed that people were busy writing as fast as they
could. It gave them something to do and would help them remember these
phrases.
Once I was done reading, I looked up. The leaders were sitting straight
up, paying full attention. A few of them had funny looks on their faces.
Without saying anything more, I invited each one to share two phrases they
had written down. This was yet more naming. Within twenty minutes, what
had never really been said out loud in this community was buzzing in
everyone’s ears. A number of phrases were repeated by different members,
thereby showing resonance within the group. It was the ripping off of a
Band-Aid. Rather than trying to get there over the course of a conversation,
we began with it all on the table. Only ninety minutes had passed, and there
was a palpable sense of both expectation and relief in the room.

The rest of the day was organized around the taboos that most resonated
with them. We spent the day getting their assumptions out in front of one
another. I used all my tricks to guide their conversation over the next six
hours. We’d gather for ninety-minute sessions at a time and then break,
gather again and break. We worked through lunch. When some people
began to dominate the conversation, I would pause them, pointing to a
ground rule if need be, and try to bring in the quieter folks. When tension
arose between two participants about a relevant topic, rather than cool it
down, if I believed it was relevant to the group, I would have them lean into
it. At one point, a specific past incident between two people arose. One of
them said something like “It’s OK, we can talk about it offline.” But
another member of the group (not in that pair) pointed out that the incident
actually reflected a dynamic that existed among a number of them, and she
thought it would be helpful for the group as a whole to discuss. Others
agreed, and I facilitated the pair through their issue in front of everyone
else.
I repeatedly urged the group to go below the surface, into the
assumptions beneath what they were talking about. When things would get
heated, I would slow them down and try to help them go “below the
iceberg.” Rather than looking at the specific incidents and events above the
water line, I would ask them how those moments revealed their underlying
beliefs, values, and needs. I would try to make what they were saying more
hearable to everyone else. So that even if they didn’t agree, they
understood.
Throughout the day, I was building their muscle as a group to
collectively witness one another, not just through being polite but, as in the
case with the cage match, through having good controversy. I continued, at
various moments, to check in with the group and with individuals to see
how they were doing. When they needed a break, we took a break. The day
was punctuated with laughter as much as with tension. Often within the
same moment. At one point, a newer member of the group expressed worry
about the direction of the conversation. She said something like “Why are
we spending time looking at all of this negative stuff? I think this is very
unproductive.” I paused. I didn’t defend. I waited. At that moment an older
leader looked at her kindly and said something along the lines of “Oh no,
this is a breakthrough. In twenty-five years, we have never had this
conversation.”

By confronting the heat, the participants began to see glimpses of
alternative, more productive ways of interacting with one another. They
became clearer on where it made sense to collaborate and where it didn’t.
They also got a lot off their chests.
As the day continued, I noticed a number of participants taking more
risks. They would voice to the group what they had written in the
workbooks. They would say out loud what they had told me on the phone in
confidence. At the end of the day, they agreed as a group to continue to
meet to pursue these conversations in greater depth. It was a step forward.
WHAT IS THE GIFT? WHAT IS THE RISK?
Seeking the heat in any gathering is inherently risky. When you can put
some process or structure around that heat-seeking, though, there is a
chance for real benefit. Still, that doesn’t mean heat-seeking should be part
of every gathering. I bring good controversy to a gathering only when I
believe some good can come out of it—enough good to outweigh the risks
and harm. For your gatherings, you should make a similar assessment.
In the course of researching this book, I met a woman named Ida
Benedetto who creates secret, underground gatherings that help guests
safely take risks they wouldn’t normally take. Benedetto and her partner N.
D. Austin are self-described “transgression consultants” and cofounders of
a design practice called Sextantworks. They were behind gatherings like the
Night Heron, a New York speakeasy housed illegally in a water tower.
Benedetto and Austin are also the creators of a fake conference called the
Timothy Convention, an annual, flash-mob-like gathering at the iconic
Waldorf Astoria hotel in New York. At this “convention,” one hundred
strangers dressed in black tie descend on the hotel and have to complete
“harmless transgressive acts,” such as “Deliver room service to a hotel
guest,” “Wear a robe in an unlikely place,” “Acquire Waldorf cutlery for
your entire team,” “Collect two business cards from hotel guests,” and take
a “team photo in the maid’s closet.” Benedetto and Austin have been
described as “New York’s wildest underground event planners,” and their
events as nights “you’ll never forget.”

Though these gatherings might appear to be frivolous, Benedetto is
driven by something deeper. Before every gathering she creates, she asks
herself two questions: What is the gift? And what is the risk? She thinks of
each of her gatherings as fulfilling a specific need for a specific group of
people. But for that gift to be given, she has learned, there needs to be some
amount of risk. “No true gift is free of risk,” Benedetto told me. She defines
risk as “a threat to one’s current state that could destabilize the way things
are.” The risk is what allows for the possibility of the gift.
In Benedetto’s gatherings, the risks are often legal and physical:
trespassing and entering abandoned buildings. But they can also be
psychological: Each Timothy Convention is designed around breaking a
small taboo or social norm. In fact, the entire gathering is designed to help
people “cross boundaries” and “transform their relationship to the city” by
changing what they assumed to be out of bounds to them.
In the same way, should you decide to bring some good controversy to
your next gathering, you can benefit from asking yourself Benedetto’s
questions: What is the gift in broaching this issue? And what is the risk? Is
it worth it? And can we handle it with care?

B
Eight
Accept That There Is an End
•       •       •
y now it’s getting late. Some of your guests could go on all night
while others are starting to look sleepy. The last of the graduating
class has accepted his diploma onstage. It’s the closing session of the
conference, and people are fumbling for their bell-desk tags, hoping to
retrieve their luggage quickly. It’s the final breakfast of the family reunion
before everyone takes off. How do you actually close this gathering? How
do you end on a high? How do you graciously say goodbye?
I NEED YOU TO BREAK UP WITH ME
Earlier we explored the widespread tendency to open without opening.
Instead of drawing us in with a bang and catering, above all, to the human
need to be welcomed and entranced, people start with logistics,
announcements, housekeeping, and the settling of corporate sponsor debts.
Now we turn to an equal and opposite problem: a widespread tendency to
close without closing. When it comes to our gatherings, far too many of us
are that horrible person who never really breaks up with anyone but just
stops calling. That person may tell himself that he is being kind or low-key.
But guests, like romantic partners, deserve a proper breakup.
Gatherers don’t skip the closing because they are bad people. They tend
to skip it because they assume that, like other elements of gathering, it will
happen on its own. They treat the closing like sunset. But as I learned when
a gathering of mine wound down in Minneapolis, the closing isn’t like
sunset at all. If it was, it would have arrived.

I was cofacilitating a two-day workshop in that city, hosted by a
foundation. Our task was to help change the way its external evaluators
measured the impact of the work the foundation funded. This might sound
dry, but in the nonprofit world it is a vital and controversial subject.
Changing what evaluators measure, and how they measure it, changes the
results of their studies. It changes which kinds of help are found to be
effective and which are not. Such adjustments could, in turn, alter what the
foundation funded. They were ready to open up their assumptions of what
actually works, which in the long run might mean ending relationships with
certain NGOs or beginning new streams of giving. This tweak in
evaluations would ultimately affect their identity and role as a funder in the
larger ecosystem of American philanthropy.
Over the course of the two days, our job was to take what these
evaluators had been trained to value and shift it. We had been hired less to
teach them the new approach than to get them to buy into it and even
believe in it.
We facilitators spent all our preparation time on the content of the
sessions. We designed role plays. We staged complicated conversations. We
figured out ways to host technical conversations on subjects we didn’t fully
understand. Everything—every session, every transition, every break—was
tightly designed, down to the minute. Everything except for the final ten
minutes of the conference. Like sunset, we assumed it would come.
Before we knew it, the two days had whizzed by, and now we were in
the final session. We had seven minutes left on the clock until the event was
officially over. The three of us hadn’t explicitly talked about how we would
close the workshop. The lead facilitator stepped up to the podium, looked at
her watch, and made a few announcements about shared rides to the airport.
The audience turned toward her, looking up attentively, waiting for more.
There was a sense of expectation in the room. She looked out at them,
presumably thinking it was obvious that we were done, but they kept staring
at her, waiting for more. “OK, thank you!” she said. Everyone kept staring.
She tried again: “We’re done here! It’s over!” Finally, after another
awkward pause, realizing there really wasn’t anything more, the attendees
broke into conversation, grabbed their bags, and left.
We closed without closing. We didn’t take stock of what they had
absorbed over the two days. We didn’t gauge their buy-in. We didn’t talk
about how they would carry what we had done together into their daily lives

—for example, by retraining their researchers in the new approach. Most
basically, though, we allowed the clock—and only the clock—to demarcate
our ending. In one of the two most vital moments in any gathering, we
offered only a gaping void. Even when our guests seemed to challenge this
void, begging with their facial expressions for more, we refused to close
meaningfully.
And the only consolation in telling you this story is that I know I am not
alone. It’s the party that is hurriedly evacuated at 10 p.m., just because it
said so on the invitation. It’s the conference that fizzles out after the last
session ends at 3:30 p.m., because there is nothing else listed on the agenda.
It’s the school homeroom that ends at 8:32 a.m., because of the bell. More
often than not at our gatherings, hosts passively allow their events to flicker
out instead of claiming a specific concluding moment—a real send-off. Too
many of our gatherings don’t end. They simply stop.
WHY CLOSINGS MATTER
I once had an improv teacher, Dave Sawyer, who told us that you can
tell the difference between good actors and great ones not by how they enter
a stage, which every actor thinks about and plans for, but how they exit.
Good actors enter dramatically and in character, say their lines, and when
they’re done, assuming their job has finished, scuttle off the stage. Great
actors spend as much time thinking about the parting. Great hosts, too.
Because great hosts, like great actors, understand that how you end things,
like how you begin them, shapes people’s experience, sense of meaning,
and memory.
Remember what Neo Muyanga, who could tell whether he was going to
like an opera within the first sixteen bars, said about closings? The second-
most-important part of the opera is the “final four pages of the score.” He
explained: “This is where the composer must have, once and for all,
justified the first notes sung and played by the ensemble and where the
conductor needs to push the entire alternate universe—the one that has
recently been magically conjured up—over the edge of the abyss, leaving
the listener to fall back into their own skin.”

That sounds like a lot, right? But it’s not as unreasonable a standard as it
may sound. As with the operas Muyanga listens to, you, too, have hopefully
created a temporary alternative world in your gathering, and it is your job to
help your guests close that world, decide what of the experience they want
to carry with them, and reenter all that from which they came.
So, you might ask, how do you actually do that? It can be as simple as a
professor’s surprise tequila party.
Michael J. Smith is a professor at the University of Virginia, and he
knows how to close. He runs the Political and Social Thought program at
the university, an intensive, two-year-long seminar that takes each class of
twenty students through a rigorous study of political philosophy. The
culminating moment of the program is the submission of a final thesis.
Students work on the thesis for more than a year. The final weeks tend to be
grueling, filled with all-nighters. It is generally the most intensively any of
the students have ever worked thus far.
Every year, Professor Smith tells his flock to bring the final thesis, every
“i” dotted and every “t” crossed, to his office at 5 p.m. on the second Friday
of April. For most professors, that would mean leaving a box outside their
office door for the students to place their bound theses and walk out. But at
the appointed time, Professor Smith, to the surprise and delight of his
students, stands inside his office, waiting for them with a platter of tequila
shots. You walk down the hall toward his office, with two printed copies of
your thesis ready to submit. And rather than slipping it through a mail slot,
you are welcomed by Professor Smith to a surprise party and inducted into
post-thesis life. With that simple act of turning an ending into a closing, he
transforms the act of submitting a thesis and creates a moment that students
never forget (including this one, from the Class of 2004).
JUST ACCEPT IT
The first step to closing a gathering well is less practical than it is
spiritual or metaphysical: You must, before anything, accept that there is an
end. You must accept your gathering’s mortality.
This may sound like a bizarre instruction, or utterly obvious. Who
doesn’t accept that their gathering has an end? People come and they go;

hosts say goodbye. Who’s not accepting the end?
Look a little closer. In so many gatherings, somewhere during the
inevitable wind-down, there comes a moment when the host or the guests or
some combination make a faint, usually futile bid to prolong it. We often
take these bids to be charming, and sometimes indeed they are. But they are
also symptoms of gatherings that lack a clear closing. We force wedding
bands to play that One Last Song three different times, so that the third- or
fourth-to-last song has the kaboom of a send-off and the remaining songs
have the quality of a balloon slowly letting out its air. We keep dinner
guests at our table for as long as the person who least wants to go home
wishes to stay, even if one or two people have started to fall asleep. We
create WhatsApp chat groups after conferences, promising to “keep the
spirit alive.” We promise to sustain what is better surrendered.
Accepting the impermanence of a gathering is part of the art. When we
vaguely try to extend our gatherings, we are not only living in denial, we
are also depriving our gathering of the kind of closing that gives it the
chance of enduring in people’s hearts.
I once went to see a couple of Zen Buddhist monks with a strange idea. I
wondered if the two of them, who had made a specialty of helping people
face their resistance and avoidance of endings, had something to teach the
everyday gatherer.
Zen teachers Robert Chodo Campbell and Koshin Paley Ellison founded
and are the guiding teachers of the New York Zen Center for Contemplative
Care, which has gained attention for its innovative and thoughtful
approaches to helping people deal with death, direct case, and Zen training.
I know what you’re thinking: Who said anything about death? I’m just
trying to have a better picnic. But I have found, again and again, that the
failure to close well is rooted in the avoidance of an end. And the people
most thoughtful about why we avoid endings, and how we might accept
them, are people who spend a lot of time thinking about death.
The Zen Center for Contemplative Care has a variety of offerings, from
meditation courses to student training in contemplative care for those facing
illness and grief and hospice care. But a thread that runs through its work is
an effort to push back against a culture that the monks see as ducking the
reality of death and endings in general. In the United States, for example,
there has been an increase in the number of people wanting to treat funerals
as celebrations rather than sad or mournful occasions. In a 2010 survey, 48

percent of people said they preferred a “celebration of life” compared with
11 percent who wanted a “traditional funeral.” One-third of all respondents
said they wanted no funeral at all. This idea of celebration may seem
evolved and selfless at first, but the monks believe it deprives people of the
experience of processing a death for what it is. In their center, they pursue
the opposite philosophy, doing everything they can to make people confront
the end for what it is. For example, when a person dies in their community,
the monks encourage, when appropriate, family members to wash and
shroud the body themselves, and to carry it down the stairs rather than
taking the elevator. They encourage people to turn toward the fact of the
death rather than away from it. And they show people that they can, in fact,
handle death.
Among the Zen Center’s offerings is a nine-month training called
Foundations in Contemplative Care. It aims to teach each cohort of thirty to
forty students how to provide a “compassionate approach to life
transitions.” Which is why it’s funny that some of these students, signing up
for this program and learning to grow more comfortable with the End, avoid
the last class. Every year, the monks told me, there tends to be regular
attendance throughout the program. And then, on the last day of class, a
handful of students will routinely fail to show—year after year, and only
ever for that last class. “People get sick. They have urgent knitting to do!
It’s really amazing. Suddenly things will come up,” said Koshin, as he is
known to his students. “There are always three or four people that have to
be at their child’s ball game, and they’ve been otherwise present.”
Students often approach the teachers seeking a prolonging. “Almost
every group, every time, during the last week, there has been a group
discussion asking me if we can extend the group by two weeks. And I
always say, ‘No, it’s done. You signed up for nine months; it’s nine
months.’ But every group does it,” Koshin said. The monks never grant
these requests “because life is not about extensions. It’s finite. There’s a
beginning, a middle, and an end. And that’s the same in a group. Once
you’ve gone through that process, what are we doing now? We’re
rehashing. What is it in you that doesn’t want this group to end?” he asked.
Understanding this tendency in students, Koshin and Chodo try to
prepare them for the end of their gathering as a class. Midway through their
nine months together, they talk to the students about their “mid-life” as a
group. “Look around again, see how it feels, how your relationships have

changed,” they might say. “We’re at our mid-life, and in four and a half
months this group will die. So what do you need to do in the next four
months in these relationships? What are your patterns of leaving? What are
your habits?” They use the group itself and the experience of being part of a
group to help them look at their own “habits of how they end things.”
Why do they do this? “Because everything ends,” Chodo said. “There’s
nothing that doesn’t end. On some level, what we do in our work is hold
that truth. This is going to end, whether you like it or not. Whether it’s
meeting your ninety-eight-year-old grandma in this hospice bed; whether
it’s a week long or a day long, it’s going to end. No question. We don’t hold
magical thinking for anyone,” he says. They will do sixty-minute lectures
with a thousand doctors in the room and have them turn to the person next
to them, try to connect briefly and deeply by looking into their eyes in
silence, and then do a guided visualization imagining that other person
getting old and frail and weak. And then the monks will ask, “What does
that do to your awareness and your relationship to this person you have just
met?” Koshin said. “People are weeping. It’s incredible.” The crux of what
they teach health-care professionals and laypeople is, as one of the monks
put it, “How do you allow them to welcome everything and push away
nothing?”
It was interesting that the monks found in the banal sphere of class
attendance the same resistance to the end that people feel about death itself.
Listening to them, I realized that the task they have set themselves in
closing their training programs is the task of every gatherer who must close
any kind of event: to help people fight their urge to turn away from the
finitude. It is your job as a gatherer to create an intentional closing that
helps people face, rather than avoid, the end.
LAST CALL
When done well, openings and closings often mirror one another. Just as
before your opening there should be a period of ushering, so with closings
there is a need to prepare people for the end. This is not ushering so much
as last call.

In drinking establishments around the world, bartenders loudly
announce last call. Why? To prepare you for the end of your time in that
place. To allow you to resolve whatever unfinished business you may have
at that bar—be that settling the tab or ordering a final drink or asking that
man for his number. The announcement of last call unites the gathering of
the bar around the knowledge of the night’s finitude. I believe many
gatherings—in homes and workplaces and beyond—could benefit from
adopting the idea behind issuing the last call.
If last calls would make our dinner parties and conferences and work
meetings better, why don’t we issue them? One reason is that, in a bar, the
closing time is an unavoidable legal reality that applies equally. In other
gatherings, people are having different experiences side by side, and
gatherers are often reluctant to impose a universal closing.
Perceptive hosts notice when an event is waning. Perhaps a few guests
are rubbing their eyes, or they start shifting in their seats, or no one is
asking questions of the panelists. The trouble for the host is that, for every
person who is tired or checking out, there are presumably others who look
as if they could keep going for hours. One of the most interesting—and
divisive—dilemmas in hosting is what to do in this situation. Do you relieve
the entire group at the first sign of a significant minority being done? Do
you quit while the party is ahead? Or do you let the guests be your guide?
I live in a house divided, because my husband is staunchly in favor of
letting people linger as long as they want, and I strongly favor ending an
event preemptively so as to give guests an escape. To Anand’s horror, when
we were first married, I would close many dinners by suddenly blurting out,
“Thank you all so much for coming!” In my mind, I was emancipating my
guests; in his, I was kicking them out. He comes from a family culture
where you always wait for the guests to signal that they’re leaving, and I
come from one where you don’t leave until your hosts, in effect, dismiss
you.
So we came to our own version of a last call. Once I can see the
conversation petering out after dessert, I pause, thank everyone for a
beautiful evening, then suggest we move to the living room to have a
nightcap. I give the guests who are tired the opportunity to leave, but both
my husband and I emphasize that we’d rather everyone stay. That invitation
to the living room is a soft close; in a sense, it’s the equivalent of the last
call. You can ask for the check, so to speak, or you can order another round.

Those who are tired can leave without appearing rude, and those who want
to stay can stay. The party, relocated and trimmed, resumes.
A last call is not a closing; it’s the beginning of an outbound ushering. A
last call can be verbal, as at our dinner parties. But it doesn’t have to be.
Dario Cecchini, at the end of the long beefy dinners he presides over, rings
a cowbell to signal the night is winding down. I know some managers who
purposefully have their assistants knock on the conference room door five
minutes before the end of the meeting to signal to them (and everyone else
there) that the meeting is finite. This knock is not the closing but a signal to
people to wind down.
WHEN AND WHO?
Maybe you are like my husband and are hesitant to give people any kind
of signal to leave. But if I have even slightly convinced you about issuing a
last call, the question of timing arises. When the law doesn’t mandate a last
call, when should it be declared?
This question of timing is particularly complicated in informal
gatherings without an agenda. On the one hand, you don’t want to kill the
vibe and seem like a party pooper. On the other hand, you shouldn’t wait
until everyone is dead.
Lady Elizabeth Anson, Queen Elizabeth’s party planner for more than
half a century, suggests ending a party while there are at least twenty people
on the dance floor. She is speaking, of course, of one particular kind of
gathering, but there is a principle behind the number. If you wait too long, it
can seem that you are being led by events instead of leading them. “If you
let it peter out, it’s death,” she once told The New York Times. Her greatest
regret involved asking a band, at the behest of certain guests, to play a last
song after their actual last song. “I made one mistake in the whole of my
career, which was being persuaded to restart the band,” she said. “It was a
flop.”
So ask yourself: What is your equivalent of the twenty-people-left-on-
the-dance-floor moment? When, by transitioning into that last call, are you
still in charge of events instead of being carried by them? When are you still
quitting while you are ahead? When are you allowing things to go on long

enough to feel satisfied with the event—but not so long as to feel the energy
draining from the room?
And who should make this decision to issue the last call?
On the night before my wedding, we hosted an evening talent show in
which many of our guests performed, borrowing from and adapting the
Indian tradition of the sangeet, which usually features choreographed
dances by friends and relatives. After all our friends’ performances, with
the mood lively and festive, the whole thing turned into a dance party. Well
into the dancing, a few friends requested that we show a video that a friend
had made for us and that had been played at a smaller rehearsal dinner the
night before. I looked out at the dance floor and people seemed to be having
a great time dancing. But here were some guests who really wanted to have
this video shown then. We hadn’t planned on showing it again, but I agreed,
thinking, “If it’s what people want . . .” We turned down the music and
watched the film. I had thought it would be fun, and a short break before
resuming the dancing. But by the end of the fifteen-minute film, guests had
cooled down and were ready to turn in. The night was over. I had ceded my
own ending by giving someone else a chance to issue a kind of unintended
last call.
On the other hand, sometimes the right decision may be to let the guests
choose their own ending. I have facilitated many dinners with teams that go
late into the night and take on a life of their own. I once facilitated a dinner
in Singapore with a team that was trying to unearth some deeper conflict.
Perhaps it was because of the late hour, or the wine, or the exhaustion, but
at 11:30 p.m. the guests finally began to speak truth, just as I was preparing
to close down the evening. I had started my last call, which in this case was
a “checkout” process, asking each person to say just one word about how
they were feeling. One of the participants interrupted me, saying: “I think
we’re finally getting somewhere. If we go to sleep, and we wake up and are
fresh and showered and back in that conference room, anything that is
getting opened up here is going to disappear. I’d like to request that we
continue this conversation and don’t close right now.” There were a number
of nods around the table, so I intentionally ceded the closing to the group.
We reopened and continued to share for ninety more minutes, ending the
session at 1:30 a.m., exhausted, but having had an emotional breakthrough
as a group.

THE ANATOMY OF A CLOSING
So you’ve issued your last call, people have been primed to think about
the end, and the event is winding down. How do you actually close?
A strong closing has two phases, corresponding to two distinct needs
among your guests: looking inward and turning outward. Looking inward is
about taking a moment to understand, remember, acknowledge, and reflect
on what just transpired—and to bond as a group one last time. Turning
outward is about preparing to part from one another and retake your place
in the world.
Looking inward: meaning-making and connecting one last
time
Many, though not all, gatherings will benefit from a pause to reflect on
what happened here. A gathering is a moment of time that has the potential
to alter many other moments of time. And for it to have the best chance of
doing so, engaging in some meaning-making at the end is crucial. What
transpired here? And why does that matter?
Whether or not a gathering creates space for meaning-making, it is
something that individual guests will do on their own. What did I think of
that? How am I going to talk about it with others? A great gatherer doesn’t
necessarily leave this process to unfold only within individuals. Rather, the
gatherer might find a way of guiding guests toward some kind of collective
exercise of stock-taking.
For example, the organizers of the TED conference often ask a
comedian to close a days-long conference with a fifteen-minute wrap. (Our
master opener Baratunde Thurston, being a great closer as well, has done
the wrap in the past.) The comedian’s assignment is not easy. He or she
must listen deeply throughout the week and then stand before hundreds of
people who have been through the same experience and, with humor and
insight, juice meaning from that multitude of moments. When a mother asks
her children every night at dinner not just what happened today, but for
their “rose” and “thorn” (the best and worst parts of their day), she is
helping them make meaning. When a group comes back onstage at the end
of a Battle of the Bands to play a mash-up of the songs the audience has

already heard, the band members are helping us process the journey as a
whole.
Looking back, though, is just one aspect of turning inward. Another is
connecting the tribe one last time. To have an affirming moment of
recalling not what we did here but who we were here.
A gathering that does this kind of final connecting well is Renaissance
Weekend. The event’s origins trace back to 1981, when a couple named
Philip and Linda Lader threw a house party to which they invited some of
the most interesting thinkers they knew. The Laders felt more and more
siloed in their work. They wanted to do something different for New Year’s
Eve, so they invited sixty families, made up of friends and acquaintances
from diverse fields across the country, down to Hilton Head, South
Carolina, for a weekend together. They asked each friend to prepare
something to share with the group. They continued doing the same year
after year, though with considerably less obscurity once two of their
longtime participants, Bill and Hillary Clinton, came into the national
spotlight. Twenty-five years later, the weekend has grown into an
organization and a series of events, with an executive director and five
annual weekends that occur around the country. The number of attendees at
their New Year’s gathering, which has since moved to Charleston, South
Carolina, is now approaching one thousand.
The organizers’ declared purpose is to build bridges across the
customary divides of race, religion, age, profession, and politics, to
encourage people to come together to agree and disagree with respect. They
are adamant about gathering people as equals, and they embed that value
into the structure of their gathering by requiring that every participant over
the age of six (yes, six!) participate in at least one panel and by doing away
with keynote speeches. The entire agenda is built from scratch each time,
based on participants’ interests that particular weekend. “If we see that
three people raise llamas, we’ll have a conversation about that,” Alison
Gelles, Renaissance’s executive director, told me.
Over the four and a half days of the festival, a certain intimacy forms.
That is because people show up as families, and because every family
member is treated as a contributor to the program, and because people are
encouraged to show different sides of themselves. When you ask a national
security expert not to talk about national security but rather what he’s

learned from love, Gelles tells me, something interesting happens, both for
those speaking and those listening.
So after going to these lengths to create that intimacy and exploration,
what does Renaissance do to tie the collective experience together? How
does it connect the tribe and affirm this new sense of belonging one last
time?
The answer is a special closing session called “If These Were My Last
Remarks.” The session features approximately twenty participants, each of
whom is given two minutes to tell the group what they would say if this
were the end of their life. People read poems, share stories about their faith,
confess doubts, recall tragedies large and small. “It’s motivating, it’s
touching, it’s tragic, and it kind of seals the bond,” Gelles said. Notably, by
asking the participants to contemplate their actual, physical mortality, the
group is subtly reminded to confront its metaphorical mortality. Most
important, though, the group is being shown itself in dramatic fashion
before it disperses. This is who we were here—open, vulnerable, thoughtful,
funny, complicated. Tribe-making is vital to meaning-making.
Turning outward: separation and reentry
Once a group has been invited to take stock and connect one last time, it
is ready for the second phase of the closing, which concerns itself with the
transition back to the world from which the gathered came. This second
phase is defined by the question: What of this world do I want to bring back
to my other worlds?
The more different from the real world your gathering was, the more
important it is to create a strong, clear ending to prepare your guests for
reentry into the real world. The more tightly bonded your gathering is, the
more it forms a tribe, the more important it is to prepare your guests for the
dissolution of that tribe and for the opportunity to join and rejoin other
tribes.
Consider the example of Seeds of Peace, a summer camp that tries to
reduce conflict and suffering in the Middle East and beyond. Every July
since 1993, several dozen teenagers from specific conflict regions,
including Israel, Palestine, Egypt, and Jordan, as well as India and Pakistan,
gather in Otisfield, Maine. They gather to see if, over the course of three

weeks, under carefully designed rules of engagement, they can create an
alternative world with the very people they are supposed to distrust, even
hate.
At Seeds of Peace, the hosts are the camp counselors, many of whom are
Seeds of Peace alumni themselves. As at many summer camps, there’s a
lake and canoeing and arts and soccer. But every day also features 110
minutes of intense, facilitated small-group conversations in which teenagers
from different sides of conflict come together to engage more deeply.
Over the course of the camp, these teenagers, many of whom are
meeting “the Other” for the first time, begin to change their perceptions. By
the end of the three weeks, when campers are boarding buses to return
home, many have gone from theoretical enemies to flesh-and-blood friends.
But the counselors also have a big responsibility to give the students the
skills to reenter their very different realities back home.
Reentry, as the term is used in conflict resolution, refers to helping
someone who has gone through an intense experience within the bubble of
a dialogue return to their original context. The term is also used for
circumstances such as soldiers returning from war or prisoners finishing
their sentences. Yet even the most ordinary comings-together of people
have an element of reentry. As a host, you can help your guests think about
what they would like to take with them as they go back into the world,
given what they have experienced with you. In the case of Seeds of Peace,
now that they’re a “seed,” how will they plant themselves in the hostile,
messy soil beyond?
At Seeds of Peace, they start reentry a full three nights before the last
day of camp. At the end of their evening talent show, the director of the
camp, Leslie Lewin, walks onto the stage in the Big Hall to make her
closing remarks. Midway through, the lights suddenly go out. It seems like
it’s just a technical glitch, but all of a sudden a Metallica song, “Enter
Sandman,” starts to play. In the dark, dozens of counselors come running
into the room with blue and green glow sticks wrapped around their heads
and arms. They dance like crazy, and then they run out to the back of the
Big Hall toward the lake. At that moment, two other lead directors jump
onstage and explain to the disoriented campers what is about to happen.
One of the camp directors will then say something like “Welcome to Color
Games. The next few days are going to be a series of events that will push
you. You will soon be divided into two teams, but you will still be

upholding and building on the values that we have been holding onto as a
community. As you join these two teams—Green and Blue—it’s an
opportunity to try new things and to step outside of ourselves.”
Unbeknownst to the campers, the process of reentry into the outside world
has begun.
Over the next two days, the campers are involved in a series of
competitive activities, from rock climbing to canoe racing, from a variety
show to an activity race they call the Hajime. During the two days of the
Color Games, a new (arbitrary) identity, Blue or Green, is purposefully
forged within each Seed. “Years later, when you talk to alumni, they will
often cite the Color Games as the most transformative experience. And they
will absolutely know if they were Blue or Green and whether they lost or
won,” Kyle Gibson, one of the camp directors, told me.
The Color Games culminate in an awards presentation. Everyone gathers
on the lake to find out the winner. The winning team gets to run into the
lake first, after which everyone joins them. Then, soaking wet, they will all
run back to their bunks, take off their colors (and Color Game identities) for
the last time, and change back into their original dark green Seeds of Peace
T-shirts.
Each step of the Color Games is designed to help them with reentering
their home lives. In addition to being fun and competitive, the games give
them an experience in which they can put on and take off an identity as
easily as switching T-shirts.
That evening, the campers gather again in those matching Seeds of
Peace T-shirts and “equality descends again.” A counselor discusses for the
first time explicitly the identity-formation that they just went through by
partaking in the Color Games. They say something like this:
Look at how quickly your identity has formed, a group of people
who maybe two days ago you didn’t talk to, but now they are forever
in your memory of this team of yours. Look at how you were
fighting till the end two days ago, and now there’s no more Green
team. There’s this construction of a team and a cause that was
valuable and supporting, but also look at how quickly we can
coalesce around this constructed identity.

The counselor then relates it back to society: “People think in groups. It
can be a force for good, in the case of the Blue and the Green, or it can also
be a force of evil, and quickly coalesce around hatred or mistrust.” They use
the Color Games to remind the campers of one of the core insights they
learn at this summer camp: how identity is created.
The final session on the last night of camp is called “Life as Seeds.” The
counselors talk about going home and how challenging it can be. Second-
year campers, having gone through the reentry process before, guide the
discussion in small groups, helping Seeds reflect on questions like these:
What does it mean to go home?
How are you feeling?
What is making you anxious?
What are you excited about?
What are some of the issues you think you might face?
During that session, the Seeds think back on the last few weeks of the
gathering and begin to integrate what they experienced with the world they
are returning to. The next morning, as the buses pull up, the campers get
into their final “Line Up,” which they have been doing three times a day for
three and a half weeks. The reality of the departure has set in. People speak,
second-year students share poems, and then they finally close. For several
years, the camp director read aloud a poem that is painted on the back of the
shower house at the camp:
I met a stranger in the night whose light had ceased to shine. I paused
and let him light his lamp from mine.
A tempest sprang up later on and shook the world about. When the
storm was over, my lamp was out.
But back to me the stranger came his lamp was glowing fine.
He held to me his precious flame and thus rekindled mine.
At that point, the students are dismissed and begin to board the buses to
head to the airport. Many are crying as they hug one another and say their
goodbyes. They know that they will be meeting other Seeds again in about
a month, which can help give them strength to hold on to this identity when

they are back home. As the buses pull out of camp, the camp bell is rung
one last time.
FINDING THE THREAD
Seeds of Peace might sound beautiful but ultimately remote from your
garden-variety gatherings. What if you’re gathering not Israelis and Arabs
but just some of your friends?
The dynamics of extreme cases are not all that different from the
dynamics of ordinary events. The advantage of the extreme is that the
dynamics are easier to see. No matter how ordinary your gathering, if you
have forged a group and created something of a temporary alternative
world, then you should also think about helping those you gathered “take
the set down” and walk back into their other worlds. Whether implicitly or
explicitly, you should help them answer these questions: We’ve collectively
experienced something here together, so how do we want to behave outside
of this context? If we see people again, what are our agreements about what
and how we’ll talk about what occurred here? What of this experience do I
want to bring with me?
At a company retreat, when only one slice of an organization has been
convened, how do you prepare employees to return to the company, where
they will be back in the mix with VPs, assistants, research fellows, and
interns?
After a family reunion, when you’ve bonded with your cousins in a way
that is harder to do when your spouses are around, how do you interact the
next time you are all together, spouses and all?
Part of preparing guests for reentry is helping them find a thread to
connect the world of the gathering to the world outside. That thread could
come in the form of a verbal or written pledge, as some conferences have
begun to do in their closing sessions. They give guests an opportunity to
make public pledges to the group of what they will do differently moving
forward, and often have a physical wall that people can write the pledges
on. A thread could be a letter that each guest can write to their future self on
a self-addressed postcard, to be mailed out by the organizer a month later. A
thread can also be a physical symbol that helps connect the two worlds in

some way, as my own mother did with a gathering she called Circle of
Friends.
When I was fifteen, she offered to host a weekly gathering in our
basement, with me and eleven other girls from my high school, to help us
think about our identity and transformation as women. She wanted to bring
her own experience as an anthropologist to help us with the fraught
transitions we found ourselves in.
My mother could have said what she wanted to say just to me, but she
realized that there was something powerful about doing it in a group. She
was aware that the group saw one another every day in school, a context
very different from the twelve pillows she set up in her basement. Over
those six weeks, the twelve of us had bonded, shared secrets and
insecurities, and learned breathing techniques and other physical practices
that could help us stand our ground in school. At the last meeting, my
mother gave each of us little multicolored spiral bracelets. I didn’t think
much of it at the time; we simply slipped them around our wrists.
The next morning, though, I wore my bracelet to school. As I ran into
the other girls in the group, I saw that many of them were wearing theirs,
too. It gave me an added confidence that I was not alone, and reminded me
to practice some of the things we had learned together. That bracelet
became a bridge from those special evenings into real life.
Two decades later, one of my friends from that group, Jenna Pirog,
reflected on the impact the gathering had on her. While the gathering was
made up of many elements, there was a component of meditation each time.
For Pirog, that part stuck:
As a 35-year-old woman, I can make sense of the social dynamics
that governed my Northern Virginia high school. Now, they seem
tame compared to what I encountered in college or later at work.
But as a 15-year-old teenager lying on floor pillows in Deepa’s
basement, this was all I knew, and my young mind was awash with
anxiety about where I fit in. The meditation group spanned the social
spectrum of our grade. One of the girls was perhaps one of the most
popular and well-liked in our school. I remember how desperately I
wanted to be friends with her. Another got such good grades that I
was too shy to speak to her for fear she would be bored by me.

Others seemed adept at the art of flirting with boys, or knew what
they wanted to be when they grew up.
But lying on the floor, then eating crackers afterwards in Deepa’s
kitchen, we were all the same, we were all calm, and we were all
there for the same purpose: to learn how to meditate. It gave us
something to talk about, something to share and something
interesting that we had in common.
What happened in Circle of Friends didn’t stay in Circle of Friends.
Doing these strange activities together in the temporary alternative world of
my mother’s basement allowed for new connections back at school, because
the two worlds were connected by a thread of reentry.
Party favors are a common, if mundane, version of the bridge, though
because they have become part of “what you do,” they often don’t have the
same effect. They represent, therefore, a ripe opportunity for rethinking and
refreshing. The next time you have the chance to distribute party favors,
whether for a child’s birthday or something more unusual, like a work
event, ask yourself: How can I use this gift to turn an impermanent moment
into a permanent memory? I once had a client give me a piece of a recycled
shipping container after a particularly intense meeting I facilitated for her in
Detroit. The meeting had been about her dream of starting a hotel in a
deserted part of town to attract investment and reanimate the area, while
highlighting the stories of the people who grew up in Detroit. The scrap sat
on my desk for many years as a reminder of the hope for rebuilding a city.
AND NOW, THE END IS NEAR
So you have made your last call, and you’ve created a moment for a
closing. You’ve helped your guests face inward, and you’ve prepared them
to turn outward again. Your time together is almost over. You’re
approaching the last few minutes of the gathering. What do you do? How
do you close with a bang?
Let’s talk first about what you don’t do. I know how hard it was to quit
the habit of opening with logistics, housekeeping, and thank-yous. But now

the end is near, and all those thanks and logistics might be pent-up, and you
might be tempted to stick them at the end instead.
Don’t even think about it.
Just as you don’t open a gathering with logistics, you should never end a
gathering with logistics, and that includes thank-yous. I was once asked to
officiate the wedding of two close friends. We were at the wedding
rehearsal, standing in the living room of the bride’s home with her parents,
her in-laws, and her husband-to-be, running through the ceremony we
designed together. We came to the final few minutes, and I happened to
notice in their notes the word “Announcement.” I asked them about it. The
groom said something like, “Well, after all of this, we’d love to say, Now
please come join us in the hall for food!”
I was horrified.
In the groom’s mind, he was ending on a tone both of graciousness (we
will now feed you!) and of practicality (that’s where to find the food). Like
openings, though, closings are a moment of power and memory formation.
Ending well is a crucial way to cement the feelings and ideas you want your
guests to take with them.
I tried to convince my friends that the guests would see where the food
was once they exited the ceremony (it was in the next room). They saw the
logic in what I said and we decided to end with a kiss, the presentation of
the newlyweds to the community, and their dramatic exit to song, followed
by their parents, and then the remaining guests. Years later, the husband
said to me: “I now never end anything on logistics. I don’t even have a
‘thank you’ slide in my presentations!” I was, of course, thrilled.
I am not suggesting that you cannot thank people. I simply mean that
you shouldn’t thank them as the last thing you do when gathering. Here’s a
simple solution: do it as the secondto-last thing.
My son’s music teacher, Jesse Goldman, is an aficionado of second-to-
last-thing logistics. He hosts half a dozen music classes every week for
toddlers. Goldman is a much-beloved teacher and singer-songwriter. His
classes are forty-five minutes long, and to close them he strums the first
note of the final song, his version of the last call, triggering the expectation
of a closing in the kids, and then he pauses and makes announcements
while still holding the note: Please turn in your check to me if you haven’t
already. No class next week. Someone left their jacket. He technically does
these logistics between the first and second note of the final song. Once he’s

finished with the logistics, he resumes the goodbye song. It’s subtle but
quietly brilliant.
The last call, the logistics, and the dramatic close. We could all come up
with our own adaptations of Goldman’s habit of striking that note, then
exploiting the space between that note and the second one.
And one further point: Once you figure out an appropriate place to tuck
any thank-yous, try to avoid making them actual, literal thank-yous. Try
honoring instead.
In far too many of our gatherings, the cue to guests that we are closing
comes through people standing up and spewing a stream of thank-yous. The
problem with that is that people’s eyes glaze over, particularly when they
follow a script. This doesn’t mean that you don’t publicly thank anyone at
your gathering, just that you need to think about how to do so, in addition to
when.
Don’t use your thanking time to describe people’s jobs and areas of
responsibility. That is better confined to LinkedIn: “To our production team,
led by Rachel, for keeping the trains running; to Scott in AV; to Sarah for
logistics.” Nobody in the audience cares about the org chart of your
gathering. Rather, find a way to honor that person instead of their job
description. This will make your thank-yous meaningful—both to those
thanked and to your guests.
When I attended a gathering called Daybreaker, a morning dance party
that occurs in dozens of cities around the world, I witnessed a fantastic
thank-you toward the end of the event. Hundreds of people meet at 6 a.m.
and, completely sober, participate in a rave before going to work. Most
Daybreaker gatherings happen in secret locations, and the one I attended
was in the basement of the iconic Macy’s department store in Herald
Square.
After the three-hour party, complete with a visit from Santa and Mrs.
Claus, a New Orleans brass band, break-dancers, illuminated sweaters, and
one person dressed up as a giant blue dreidel, one of the organizers, Radha
Agrawal, grabbed a microphone and asked everyone to sit down. She
thanked the members of the Macy’s team by name, and made us realize
what a risk Macy’s took to do something so wild: Many of the organizers
hadn’t slept the night before so that they could clear the floor. They took a
huge leap of faith in admitting three hundred strangers and trusting them
not to steal anything. Agrawal reminded us that people have to take chances

to do something extraordinary, which was a lesson she wanted us to take
back to our real lives.
So she made the thank-yous meaningful, honoring what was least rather
than most obvious about what people did in the run-up to the event. And
she massaged those thank-yous into a lesson for the rest of us, so that it
didn’t feel like housekeeping. She didn’t let those thanks, elevated though
they were, mark the ending. Instead, she closed by handing out copies of a
poem that Daybreaker events routinely end on. She understood how vital it
is to end freshly and well.
MY OWN LAST CALL
We are approaching the end of this book, and I would not want to end on
thank-yous after telling you not to do so. And so I’d like to pause before we
end and honor the people who have helped me create this gathering.
Zoë Pagnamenta, my agent, who believed in me and this book from the
very beginning. Jake Morrissey, my indefatigable editor, who helped me
through multiple rounds of this manuscript until it settled into its skin. Jane
Fransson, my chief organizer, cheerleader, and first line of defense. My
writing group—Ann Burack-Weiss, Mindy Fullilove, Maura Spiegel, Jack
Saul, Kelli Harding, Jim Gilbert, and Simon Fortin—for reminding me on
those Friday mornings to preserve the spirit of “the mess of groups.” My
dear friends and family—Rukmini Giridharadas, Tom Ferguson, Mo
Mullen, Kate Krontiris, and Luis Araújo—for your close reads of the
manuscript. The good folks at Wet Dog Farm for helping me see what this
book could be. The entire team at Riverhead—especially Katie Freeman,
Jynne Dilling Martin, Lydia Hirt, and Kevin Murphy—whose enthusiasm,
creativity, and championing of authors show in everything you do; I am so
grateful to be in your orbit. My professional community, especially Amy
Fox and Mobius Executive Leadership, for keeping me both sharp and
open, and for embodying power and love. My six parents, for always
cheering me on. My husband, Anand Giridharadas, for being by my side
with this book from the time of the seed to the time of the harvest. I could
not have done this without you. And the late Harold “Hal” Saunders, who

taught me, and many others on many continents, that when you gather
differently, everything can change.
RECALL YOUR PURPOSE
As you close, there may be a brief moment to hark back to the place this
book began—to your purpose for gathering. There is often a subtle way to
remind people of why what is now ending was initiated in the first place.
My friend Emily told me a story about a trip she made to Jamaica to
volunteer for an NGO. One day she was cohosting a pool party for kids
from the countryside. The end approached, and there wasn’t necessarily a
plan for a “closing.” This concerned Emily, because not long before her
trip, I had lectured her about closings. And it concerned her, moreover,
because it had been a powerful day, more powerful than your usual pool
party. Many of the children there had never swum before, despite being
from an island nation—a legacy that dates back to colonial laws in the
Caribbean forbidding slaves from swimming, out of fear that they would
escape. Emily and the other volunteers and the children themselves had
been visibly moved by the day, and now it was over. But there was nothing
to mark the end.
There was a school bus waiting outside. Emily knew that, within
minutes, the kids would have to file out for a bumpy four-hour bus ride
back home. So she grabbed as many volunteers as she could and lined them
up in the front hallway to wait for the kids to file through. As the first kids
started to come in, the volunteers started clapping and cheering and high-
fiving and hugging the kids as they walked down the hall.
“The children looked overwhelmed and bewildered, but also utterly
thrilled to be celebrated like that by these people they had only just met but
already formed close bonds with,” Emily told me. It was a closing that
embodied the gathering’s purpose: communicating to a group of kids that
they matter.
My father-in-law, without any pressure from me, ends a course he
teaches by recalling his purpose in his own compelling way. He is a
professor at the George Washington University School of Business, in
Washington, D.C. At the end of every semester, he has three slides ready for

the students. One is titled “Work-life balance,” one is titled “Meaning,” and
the third has a poem he reads aloud. He begins that final class not by
reviewing lessons from the course (which is on management consulting),
but by warning about the seductions of the consulting field and the dangers
of not pursuing meaning and balance from the beginning.
“I advise them not to wait till it becomes a crisis before committing to
living a balanced life,” he told me. “Recognizing that you cannot balance
your life at every moment, I urge them to think of immediate priorities so
that over an arc of eighteen to twenty-four months, their life seems to be
balanced and under control,” he said. He then performs a card trick, and at
the end of the trick he says to his students that while it looks like magic, it
is just technique, and that he hopes for them to master the techniques in his
course until they look like magic. Then he reads a poem by the Irish poet
John O’Donohue, “For a New Beginning,” urging his students to “Unfurl
yourself into the grace of beginning.” Finally, he ends the way the class
began, by asking the students to close in a minute of silence.
All this for a consulting class? I had heard from him that, year after year,
the students are really moved, with the class often ending in tears. (He also
regularly wins teaching awards.) I asked him why he spent his final class in
this way. He said the send-off was not only to remind his students of their
purpose together in the class, but to remind himself of his own purpose as a
teacher as well. He teaches, he said, because he likes the idea of investing in
“citizens of character that I am unleashing into the world.” The content of
his course is incidental to that larger purpose. And so after a semester of
delving into the specifics of consulting, he wants to remind his students
why he is in the classroom and why they are, too.
Those closing moments can also be a time to connect your specific
gathering to the universal. When Amy Cunningham, a funeral director in
New York, ends a service, she purposefully tries to connect the grief of the
family with that of mourners everywhere. She told me that she often ends
her service by saying, “May the source of peace grant you peace, and grant
peace to all who mourn.” She connects this individual suffering to the larger
existence of suffering in the world, thereby making it both smaller and
bigger.

THE EXIT LINE
You may remember the idea of the threshold from the chapter on
openings. You draw a line and you help your guests walk over it. There is
an analogous concept to employ when closing.
With your guests now leaving the world of your gathering, it is time to
draw another line, the line of exit, and help them cross this, too. The last
moments of a well-run gathering are, subtly or explicitly, a crossing of that
line, a signal that it is over. The closing’s closing, so to speak, should
represent a marking and an emotional release. It can take many forms.
The exit line can be physical and symbolic. On Commencement Day,
Princeton University students walk through the FitzRandolph Gate at the
end of the ceremony, a gate they have been warned never to pass through
until that day for fear of not graduating. The sustaining of that myth of not
graduating, and then the crossing of the line on the appointed day, makes it
clear that this day is unlike the other days, and that this time is over.
In certain parts of Colombia, villagers still bid goodbye to the year gone
by making an “Año Viejo,” or Old Year, a human-shaped effigy, sometimes
stuffed with hay and fireworks, that represents a negative theme of the past
year that they wish to burn. They dress it up, give it a funny name, and on
New Year’s Eve burn it. With or without their effigy, the year would end.
But the exit line underlines that ending and converts it into a proper closing.
The exit line can also, or instead, be drawn through language. In my own
Labs, as the very last act, I often have everyone stand in a circle. Then I
mirror my opening, in which I had read aloud excerpts from what people
told me in interviews or workbooks ahead of time. The grist for the closing
version of this exercise is not what people sent in beforehand but rather
what occurred during the Lab. All day long, I have been taking notes on
what people say and jotting down specific phrases, confessions, epiphanies,
jokes, and one-liners that I think capture an important moment. Then, in my
closing, after all the other participants have shared, I have them stand up,
look at one another, and listen. I read aloud bits and phrases that people
have said over the preceding day. In hearing their own voices, presented in
the order of the day’s events, they are reminded of all we did together. I am
also showing them how deeply they were listened to, and signaling to them
that what they said was remembered. Finally, I come to my last quote.
(Often it is something that was said by another participant in their closing

comments just a few minutes prior to me speaking.) I close my iPad or the
notebook from which I’m reading. I pause. I look up. I let the moment
hang. And then I say some version of “I pronounce this Lab . . .”—then I
clap: an exit line—“closed.” I mark it. I end it. And they are released. And
usually everyone starts clapping. It’s over. (Don’t worry. I don’t do this at
parties.)
Whatever your final moment is, it should be authentic and make sense in
your context.
When Amy Cunningham first began work at a funeral home, she
struggled with how to help people exit a funeral. It is a hard and awkward
moment, and most people aren’t sure what to do. Do you just walk away?
Do you wait? Do you say a round of goodbyes, or is that better for Super
Bowl parties? What order should people exit?
Cunningham derived inspiration from studying the funeral rituals of
various cultures. And she ended up adopting one from the Jewish tradition.
In it, the person presiding over the funeral asks everyone except for the
immediate family to form two lines facing each other, making a kind of
human hallway from the gravesite to the cars. Then the rabbi asks the
immediate family to turn away from the grave and walk down that
makeshift aisle, and as they do so, to look into the eyes of their friends, who
“are now like pillars of constancy and love.” Cunningham described it as “a
way to usher them into the next part of their journey, and the next stage of
their grieving.” As the family walks by, the people at the farthest-back part
of the line fold in and follow them, and then the rest, slowly, join a kind of
procession out of the cemetery. It is a simple structural process that helps
organize a group and facilitate a graceful exit. Yet it does so in a purposeful
way that supports the people who most need it, connects them to the people
still present, and gives everyone a way to move forward together.
A good and meaningful closing doesn’t conform to any particular rules
or form. It’s something you have to build yourself, in keeping with the spirit
of your gathering, in proportion to how big a deal you want to make of it.
Just because it’s a regular weekly sales meeting doesn’t mean that a closing
is too fancy or strange. A huddle and group chant of “Front line matters!”
before the meeting ends might quickly but meaningfully remind people why
they choose to do what they do. Just because it’s a casual dinner with
friends doesn’t mean it shouldn’t have a closing. A simple, subtle one, like
a goodbye chocolate as they walk out the door, can make a difference. Even

a minimalist closing can manage to acknowledge what transpired and offer
a release.
There are masterful closers everywhere, finding small but powerful
ways to metaphorically wrap their gatherings in a bow and thereby
distinguish them. It’s the yoga classes that end in a collective “Om” versus
those that don’t. It’s teachers who end class on a story versus those who end
with an assignment. It’s walking your guests to the door to say goodbye
versus having them let themselves out. Sometimes it can be just a pause, a
moment, a tight squeeze, to acknowledge what has happened.
As with every rule, there are exceptions. I know of a wonderful
gathering of friends who decided to do their partings in defiance of
everything I have preached. They decided that they don’t much like
goodbyes. And so when they gather and the night is approaching its end,
without any coordination or warning or ceremony, each person just leaves
whenever he or she feels like it. It is an evening that ends with a collective
ghosting. This breaks many of my minor rules, but it aces one of my
transcendent principles. The friends found a way to say, “This gathering
was different from all the others.”

Notes
Introduction
“With the occasional exception” Duncan Green, “Conference Rage: ‘How Did Awful Panel
Discussions Become the Default Format?’” Guardian, June 2, 2016,
https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-
network/2016/jun/02/conference-rage-how-did-awful-panel-discussions-become-the-default-
format.
“wasteful meetings” Harris Poll, The State of Enterprise Work (Lehi, UT: Workfront, 2015),
accessed October 10, 2017, https://resources.workfront.com/ebooks-whitepapers/the-state-of-
enterprise-work.
75 percent of respondents were unsatisfied Tim Walker and Alia McKee, The State of Friendship
in America 2013: A Crisis of Confidence (Brooklyn: LifeBoat, 2013), accessed October 10,
2017,
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5560cec6e4b0cc18bc63ed3c/t/55625cabe4b0077f89b718e
c/1432509611410/lifeboat-report.pdf.
“As traditional religion struggles” Angie Thurston and Casper ter Kuile, How We Gather
(Cambridge: Crestwood Foundation, 2015), accessed May 15, 2015,
https://caspertk.files.wordpress.com/2015/04/how-we-gather.pdf.
Chapter 1: Decide Why You’re Really Gathering
In college, we stare Digital learning organizations such as the Khan Academy have popularized the
“flipped classroom” model where students learn material from online videos and teachers
become facilitators of learning rather than imparters of knowledge.
not wanting any funeral Alan D. Wolfelt, Creating Meaningful Funeral Ceremonies (Fort Collins,
CO: Companion Press), 1. According to a 2010 survey conducted by Funeralwise.com, 31
percent of people want no funeral at all. Wolfelt runs the Center for Loss and Life Transition
based in Fort Collins, Colorado. He writes extensively about the purpose of authentic funeral
ceremonies. He believes we have forgotten the many purposes of a funeral and worries about a
growing trend of people who want “celebrations of life” rather than “traditional” funerals. “We
have confused honoring with celebration and celebration with partying. And regretfully, we’ve
transferred this idea onto funerals,” he writes.
Its founders The Justice Center was formed as a partnership between the New York State Unified
Court System and the Center for Court Innovation, a nonprofit that works to reform the justice
system throughout New York City and the world.
“It was either prosecute or dismiss” “Alex Calabrese, Judge, Red Hook Community Justice Center:
Interview,” accessed October 17, 2017, https://www.courtinnovation.org/publications/alex-
calabrese-judge-red-hook-community-justice-center-0.
“Obviously, this is a good result” Alex Calabrese in Red Hook Justice, 5:16.

“We give them every reasonable chance” Jim Dwyer, “A Court Keeps People Out of Rikers While
Remaining Tough,” The New York Times, June 11, 2015,
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/12/nyregion/a-court-keeps-people-out-of-rikers-while-
remaining-tough.html?_r=0.
According to independent evaluators Cynthia G. Lee, Fred L. Cheesman II, David Rottman,
Rachel Swaner, Suvi Hynynen Lambson, Michael Rempel, and Ric Curtis, A Community Court
Grows in Brooklyn: A Comprehensive Evaluation of the Red Hook Community Justice Center.
(Williamsburg, VA: National Center for State Courts, 2013), accessed November 15, 2017,
https://www.courtinnovation.org/sites/default/files/documents/RH%20Evaluation%20Final%20
Report.pdf.
“I have been in the justice system” Alex Calabrese in Red Hook Justice, 7:18.
many no longer want See, for example, Mitali Saran, “I Take This Man/Woman with a Pinch of
Salt,” Business Standard, December 6, 2014, http://www.business-
standard.com/article/opinion/mitali-saran-i-take-this-man-woman-with-a-pinch-of-salt-
114120600014_1.html; Sejal Kapadia Pocha, “From Sexist Traditions to Mammoth Costs, Why
It’s Time We Modernised Asian Wedding Ceremonies,” Stylist.co.uk, June 23, 2015,
https://www.stylist.co.uk/life/bride-groom-cost-traditions-why-it-s-time-asian-indian-weddings-
changed-modernised/60667; Jui Mukherjee, “Mom and Dad, You’re Not Invited to My
Wedding,” India Opines, November 13, 2014, http://indiaopines.com/sexist-indian-wedding-
rituals/.
First conceived in 1946 Kyle Massey, “The Old Page 1 Meeting, R.I.P.: Updating a Times Tradition
for the Digital Age,” The New York Times, May 12, 2015, https://www.nytimes.com/times-
insider/2015/05/12/the-old-page-1-meeting-r-i-p-updating-a-times-tradition-for-the-digital-age/?
_r=1.
“only a third of our readers” A. G. Sulzberger, The Innovation Report (New York: The New York
Times, March 2014), http://www.niemanlab.org/2014/05/the-leaked-new-york-times-innovation-
report-is-one-of-the-key-documents-of-this-media-age/.
In an email to his staff Massey, “The Old Page 1 Meeting.”
Chapter 2: Close Doors
“If everyone is family, no one is family” Barack Obama, Dreams from My Father (New York:
Crown, 2004), 337.
In 2010, what was then your standard-issue retirement community decided to try an
experiment Heather Hansman, “College Students Are Living Rent-Free in a Cleveland
Retirement Home,” Smithsonian.com, October 16, 2015,
https://www.smithsonianmag.com/innovation/college-students-are-living-rent-free-in-cleveland-
retirement-home-180956930/.
The idea was rooted in studies Hansman, “College Students.”
in the Netherlands to much fanfare Carey Reed, “Dutch Nursing Home Offers Rent-Free Housing
to Students,” PBS News Hour, April 5, 2015, https://www.pbs.org/newshour/world/dutch-
retirement-home-offers-rent-free-housing-students-one-condition.
“What is the match?” “Music Students Living at Cleveland Retirement Home,” YouTube video,
3:09, posted by “The National,” November 9, 2015, https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=hW2KNGgRNX8.
“That’s where life is” “Music Students Living at Cleveland Retirement Home,” YouTube video.
“It’s crazy to think” Daniel Parvin in “Music Students Living at Cleveland Retirement Home,”
YouTube video.
“The room is doing eighty percent of the job” Colin Cowherd, The Thundering Herd with Colin
Cowherd, Podcast audio, June 4, 2015, 25:08, bit.ly/1IgyxQf.

more than $20 billion Nikhil Deogun, Dennis K. Berman, and Kevin Delaney, “Alcatel Nears Deal
to Acquire Lucent for About $23.5 Billion in Stock,” Wall Street Journal, May 29, 2001,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB991078731679373566.
“In Alcatel’s failed effort” Eric Pfanner and International Herald Tribune, “Failure of Alcatel-
Lucent Merger Talks Is Laid to National Sensitivity in the U.S.: Of Pride and Prejudices,” New
York Times, May 31, 2001, http://www.nytimes.com/2001/05/31/news/failure-of-alcatellucent-
merger-talks-is-laid-to-national-sensitivity.html.
“Lucent officials are reported” “Alcatel-Lucent Merger Is Off,” BBC News, May 30, 2001,
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/business/1358535.stm.
merger between Lucent and Alcatel Vikas Bajaj, “Merger Deal Is Reached with Lucent and
Alcatel,” New York Times, April 3, 2006, http://www.nytimes.com/2006/04/03/business/merger-
deal-is-reached-with-lucent-and-alcatel.html.
“gazed with surprise” Patrick Leigh Fermor, Mani: Travels in the Southern Peloponnese (New
York: NYRB Classics, 1958), 31.
Fermor’s New York Times obituary Richard B. Woodward, “Patrick Leigh Fermor, Travel Writer,
Dies at 96,” New York Times, June 11, 2011, http://www.nytimes.com/2011/06/11/books/patrick-
leigh-fermor-travel-writer-dies-at-96.html.
occurs in a different space “Ed Cooke—Memory Techniques for Learning,” The Conference,
August 19, 2014, http://videos.theconference.se/ed-cooke-memory-techniques-for-learning.
“square feet of your party space” Maxwell Ryan, “Party Architecture: #1—Density,” Apartment
Therapy, December 15, 2008, https://www.apartmenttherapy.com/party-architecture-density-
how-to-plan-a-party-5359.
Chapter 3: Don’t Be a Chill Host
spice up the night Werewolf, also called Mafia, is a psychological group game created by a teacher,
Dmitry Davidoff, in the psychology department of Moscow State University during the Cold
War that has spread across Europe and to the United States, where it has become popular at late-
night technology conferences. See, for example, Margaret Robertson, “Werewolf: How a
Parlour Game Became a Tech Phenomenon,” Wired UK, February 4, 2010,
http://www.wired.co.uk/article/werewolf.
Alana Massey’s essay “Against Chill” Alana Massey, “Against Chill,” Medium, April 1, 2015,
https://medium.com/matter/against-chill-930dfb60a577.
cut off much of his tie Chris Anderson, TED Talks: The Official TED Guide to Public Speaking
(New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2016), 190.
“On the corner of” Jessica P. Ogilvie, “Amy Schumer’s Irvine Set Disrupted by Lady Heckler,” Los
Angeles Magazine, October 12, 2015, http://www.lamag.com/culturefiles/amy-schumers-irvine-
set-disrupted-by-lady-heckler/.
“I’ve texted in all” Alamo Drafthouse, “Don’t Talk PSA,” YouTube video, 1:46, posted June 2011,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1L3eeC2lJZs.
“When you are in a cinema” Tim League, “Alamo Drafthouse: Them’s the Rules,” CNN.com, June
10, 2011,
http://www.cnn.com/2011/SHOWBIZ/Movies/06/10/alamo.drafthouse.league/index.html.
“At public ceremonies” Lucia Stanton, Spring Dinner at Monticello, April 13, 1986, in Memory of
Thomas Jefferson (Charlottesville, VA: Thomas Jefferson Memorial Foundation), 1–9.
“The ensuing social tempest” Stanton, Spring Dinner at Monticello.
Whether addressing students at Benedict College “Text from President’s speech, Q&A at Benedict
College,” WYFF4.COM, March 6, 2015, http://www.wyff4.com/article/text-from-president-s-
speech-q-a-at-benedict-college/7013346.

public question-and-answer “Remarks by the President at a Town Hall on Manufacturing,” Office
of the Press Secretary, the White House, published October 3, 2014,
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-office/2014/10/03/remarks-president-town-hall-
manufacturing.
his own press corps At his annual year-end conference in 2014, Obama took it even further by only
answering questions from female journalists. See Kathleen Hennessey, “Obama Takes Questions
Only from Women, Apparently a White House First,” Los Angeles Times, December 19, 2014,
http://beta.latimes.com/nation/politics/politicsnow/la-pn-obama-reporters-women-20141219-
story.html.
“There was something radically democratic” Deborah Davis, Party of the Century: The Fabulous
Story of Truman Capote and His Black and White Ball (New York: Wiley, 2006).
He even had thirty-nine-cent masks Guy Trebay, “50 Years Ago, Truman Capote Hosted the Best
Party Ever,” The New York Times, November 21, 2016,
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/21/fashion/black-and-white-ball-anniversary-truman-
capote.html.
Chapter 4: Create a Temporary Alternative World
From SheKnows.com Kat Trofimova, “Ways to Spice Up Your Next Dinner Party,” SheKnows.com,
December 2, 2013, http://www.sheknows.com/food-and-recipes/articles/1064647/ways-to-spice-
up-a-dinner-party.
From the online-invitation company Evite “5 Ways to Spice Up Your Office Party,” Evite.com,
retrieved August 26, 2017, https://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:4Z5QBG-
pOjcJ:https://ideas.evite.com/planning/5-ways-to-spice-up-your-office-
party/+&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=us&client=safari.
From Wisdump Sophia Lucero, “Holding a Conference? Spice It Up with These Geeky Ideas,”
Wisdump.com, January 21, 2011, https://www.wisdump.com/web-experience/geeky-
conference-ideas/.
From the Catholic Youth Ministry Hub Eric Gallagher, “Twelve Ways to Spice Up Your Next
Youth Group Breakfast,” Catholic Youth Ministry Hub, March 23, 2011,
https://cymhub.com/twelve-ways-to-spice-up-your-next-youth-group-breakfast/.
so-called Jeffersonian Dinner “How to Plan a Jeffersonian Dinner,” The Generosity Network,
accessed August 25, 2017, http://www.thegenerositynetwork.com/resources/jeffersonian-
dinners.
“a three year curriculum” “Junior Cotillion: 5th–8th Grade,” National League of Junior Cotillions,
accessed August 30, 2017, http://nljc.com/programs/junior-cotillion-5th-8th-grade/.
“You have acquired knowledge” Philip Dormer Stanhope, Letters to His Son on the Fine Art of
Becoming a Man of the World and a Gentleman (Toronto: M. W. Dunne, 1901), 302.
“We truly believe manners” “History,” National League of Junior Cotillions, accessed August 30,
2017, http://nljc.com/about/history/.
“among the most successful” “History,” National League of Junior Cotillions.
flash mob of a dinner party Technically, it’s been pointed out to me that Dîner en Blanc is not a
traditional “flash mob” per se, as every organizer is required to obtain local permits.
women sit on one side This rule has been a hotly contested one, and in Tokyo, they chose not to
observe it. “In Tokyo, for example, where the pair is of the same sex (not necessarily because
they are gay or lesbian but simply because they are more comfortable attending parties with
friends of the same sex), this rule is not observed,” Kumi Ishihara, the organizer and licensee of
Dîner en Blanc Tokyo, told me.
“Over the past three and a half years” Dîner en Blanc, “Dîner en Blanc 2015 Official Video,”
YouTube video, posted on October 15, 2015, https://www.youtube.com/watch?

v=x4Er5bWJeY8.
male side and a female side This gendered rule is one of the organizers’ more controversial rules.
Ishihara and the Japanese organizers, for cultural reasons, received permission not to follow this
rule, and guests could bring a guest of either gender along with them.
Singaporean food was “formal” enough Walter Lim, “The Dîner en Blanc Debacle,” Cooler
Insights, August 25, 2012, http://coolerinsights.com/2012/08/the-diner-en-blanc-debacle/.
“ancient colonial master mindset” Rendall, August 25, 2012, comment on “SINGAPORE TAU
HUAY TOO LOW CLASS FOR FRENCH UPSCALE EVENT DINER EN BLANC?!”
Moonberry Blog, August 24, 2012, http://blog.moonberry.com/singapore-tau-huay-too-low-
class-for-french-upscale-event/.
“Um, so if I’m part of a same-sex couple” Allison Baker, “Why I’m Not Going to Dîner en Blanc,”
Nuts to Soup (blog), July 28, 2012, https://nutstosoup.wordpress.com/2012/07/28/why-im-not-
going-to-diner-en-blanc/.
“No event has ever” Maura Judkis, “Why Do People Hate Dîner en Blanc? The Word ‘Pretentious’
Keeps Coming Up,” The Washington Post, August 26, 2016,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/food/why-do-people-hate-diner-en-blanc-the-word-
pretentious-keeps-coming-up/2016/08/24/3639f2c6-6629-11e6-be4e-23fc4d4d12b4_story.html?
utm_term=.458b82f6d226.
“This whole thing makes me feel” Kevin Allman, “Le Dîner en Blanc: The Great Doucheby,”
Gambit, April 4, 2013,
https://www.bestofneworleans.com/blogofneworleans/archives/2013/04/04/le-diner-en-blanc-
the-great-doucheby.
“snobbish” Sabrina Maddeaux, “Toronto’s Most Stupidly Snobbish Food-Meets-Fashion Event
Returns,” Now Toronto, August 5, 2015, https://nowtoronto.com/lifestyle/t/.
“ad hoc, barely-even-organized, family-friendly” Alexandra Gill, “Dîner en Blanc Is Overrated.
Try Ce Soir Noir, Vancouver’s Playful Alternative,” Globe and Mail, August 26, 2016,
https://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/british-columbia/ce-soir-noir-vancouvers-playful-
subsititute-for-diner-en-blanc/article31585611/.
“The beautiful thing about this event” Jennifer Picht, “This Is What Happens When You Go to
Dîner en Blanc in NYC,” Time Out, September 16, 2016,
https://www.timeout.com/newyork/blog/this-is-what-happens-when-you-go-to-diner-en-blanc-
in-nyc-091616.
“We may have been all dressed in white” Shane Harris, “D.C.’s Snobbery-Free ‘Diner en Blanc’
Showed Washington at Its Partying Best,” Daily Beast, August 31, 2015,
https://www.thedailybeast.com/dcs-snobbery-free-diner-en-blanc-showed-washington-at-its-
partying-best.
average of 150 times a day “2017 Global Mobile Consumer Survey: US Edition,” Deloitte
Development LLC. https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/us/Documents/technology-
media-telecommunications/us-tmt-2017-global-mobile-consumer-survey-executive-
summary.pdf.
“Never before in history” Bianca Bosker, “The Binge Breaker,” Atlantic, November 2016,
https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2016/11/the-binge-breaker/501122/?
utm_source=atltw.
Law of Two Feet “A Brief User’s Guide to Open Space Technology,” Open Space World, accessed
November 30, 2017, http://www.openspaceworld.com/users_guide.htm.
“merely to eliminate all the guilt” “Opening Space for Emerging Order,” Open Space World,
accessed November 30, 2017, http://www.openspaceworld.com/brief_history.htm.
Chapter 5: Never Start a Funeral with Logistics

“Party-Planning Guide” “Party-Planning Guide,” Martha Stewart.com, accessed August 30, 2017,
https://www.marthastewart.com/275412/party-planning-guide.
She breaks creating a gathering Rashelle Isip, “The 10 Lists You Need to Make to Plan a Great
Party or Event,” Lifehack, accessed August 30, 2017,
http://www.lifehack.org/articles/lifestyle/the-10-lists-you-need-make-plan-great-party-
event.html.
“It was blissful torture” David Colman, “Mystery Worker,” New York Times, April 29, 2011,
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/05/01/fashion/01POSSESSED.html.
“parking for your Landspeeder” Brooks Barnes, “‘Star Wars: The Force Awakens’ Has World
Premiere, No Expense Spared,” New York Times, December 15, 2015,
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/16/business/media/star-wars-the-force-awakens-
premiere.html?_r=0.
“All of us have anti-bucket lists” Sarah Lyall, “Starring Me! A Surreal Dive into Immersive
Theater,” New York Times, January 7, 2016,
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/08/theater/starring-me-a-surreal-dive-into-immersive-
theater.html.
“the artist’s medium is the body” “Conceptual Art,” MoMA Learning, accessed September 12,
2017, https://www.moma.org/learn/moma_learning/themes/conceptual-art/performance-into-art.
“hypnotic wonderment” Jacob Slattery, “Hypnotic Wonderment: Marina Abramović and Igor
Levit’s Goldberg Variations at Park Avenue Armory,” Bachtrack, December 10, 2015,
https://bachtrack.com/review-goldberg-variations-abramovic-levit-park-avenue-armory-new-
york-december-2015.
Studies show that audiences disproportionately remember Neal Hartmann, “Community Strategy
and Structure; Persuasion and Ethics,” MIT Sloan School of Management, September 10, 2013.
See also Daniel Kahneman studies.
“we want to take you into a future” Micah Sifry, “[#PDF15 Theme] Imagine All the People: The
Future of Civic Tech,” techPresident, March 17, 2015,
http://techpresident.com/news/25488/pdf15-theme-imagine-all-people-future-civic-tech.
Tough Mudder Pledge “Tough Mudder Facts & Trivia,” Tough Mudder, accessed November 27,
2017, https://mudder-guide.com/guide/tough-mudder-facts-and-trivia/#pledge.
“Tough Mudder was built” Dan Schawbel, “Will Dean: How to Build a Tribe Around Your
Business,” Forbes.com, September 12, 2017,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/danschawbel/2017/09/12/will-dean-how-to-build-a-tribe-around-
your-business/#1e9757224005.
“People get up on the box” Chris Gardner, “‘I Love Dick’ Cast Inherits ‘Transparent’s’ Emotional
Exercise,” Hollywood Reporter, May 4, 2017, https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/rambling-
reporter/i-love-dick-cast-inherits-transparents-emotional-exercise-997344.
“Things get purged” Gardner, “‘I Love Dick’ Cast.”
“This woman got up there” Gardner, “‘I Love Dick’ Cast.”
“cry when they leave our set” Kelly Schremph, “The Unexpected Way ‘Transparent’ and Jill
Soloway Are Changing How Great TV Is Made,” Bustle.com, September 23, 2016,
https://www.bustle.com/articles/184353-the-unexpected-way-transparent-jill-soloway-are-
changing-how-great-tv-is-made.
“It turns into this collective moment” Schremph, “The Unexpected Way.”
“We get to play” Jason McBride, “Jill Soloway’s New Family,” Vulture.com, July 25, 2016,
http://www.vulture.com/2016/07/jill-soloway-i-love-dick-c-v-r.html.
fell by 35 percent “Atul Guwande’s ‘Checklist’ for Surgery Success,” Steve Inskeep, Morning
Edition, National Public Radio, accessed November 2017
https://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=122226184.

“conferences can be re-imagined” “How Spark Camp Came About,” Spark Camp, accessed August
30, 2017, http://sparkcamp.com/about/.
Chapter 6: Keep Your Best Self Out of My Gathering
“provide innovative thinking” “1,500 World Leaders, Pioneers and Experts Volunteer to Tackle
Global Challenges,” World Economic Forum, accessed September 25, 2017,
https://www.weforum.org/press/2014/09/1500-world-leaders-pioneers-and-experts-volunteer-to-
tackle-global-challenges/.
“profound shift in the context” Lynda Gratton, “Global Agenda Council on New Models of
Leadership,” World Economic Forum, 2012, http://reports.weforum.org/global-agenda-council-
on-new-models-of-leadership/.
Scholars like Brené Brown Brené Brown, Daring Greatly: How the Courage to Be Vulnerable
Transforms the Way We Live, Love, Parent, and Lead (New York: Gotham Books, 2012), 2.
Crucible moments Bill George, “Coping with Crucibles,” Huffington Post, September 1, 2015,
https://www.huffingtonpost.com/bill-george/coping-with-crucibles_b_8071678.html.
He issued a public invitation “Party Puts Conversation on the Menu,” BBC, August 22, 2009,
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/england/london/8215738.stm.
Chapter 7: Cause Good Controversy
“doing or saying anything offensive” James Anderson and Benjamin Franklin, “The Constitutions
of the Free-Masons (1734): An Online Electronic Edition,” edited by Paul Royster, Faculty
Publications, University of Nebraska—Lincoln Libraries, 25,
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1028&context=libraryscience.
“Do not discuss politics” Thomas Edie Hill, Hill’s Manual of Social and Business Forms: A Guide
to Correct Writing, (Chicago: Standard Book Co., 1883), 153.
“Talk about things” Emily Post, Etiquette: In Society, in Business, in Politics and at Home (New
York: Funk & Wagnalls Company, 1922), 55.
“The goal of etiquette” Anne Brown, August 11, 2015, answer on the question, “Why is it
considered rude to discuss sex, politics, and religion?,” Quora, https://www.quora.com/Why-is-
it-considered-rude-to-discuss-sex-politics-and-religion?share=1.
commencement speech at Rutgers University Kelly Heyboer, “Condoleezza Rice Pulls Out of
Giving Rutgers Commencement Speech,” NJ.com, May 3, 2014,
http://www.nj.com/education/2014/05/condoleezza_rice_pulls_out_of_giving_rutgers_commenc
ement_speech.html.
address to Smith College Alexandra Sifferlin, “IMF Chief Withdraws as Commencement Speaker,”
Time.com, May 12, 2014, http://time.com/96501/imf-chief-withdraws-as-smith-college-
commencement-speaker/.
“run to, and not away from, the noise” White House Remarks by the First Lady at Oberlin College
Commencement Address, 2015, accessed November 30, 2017, available at
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-office/2015/05/25/remarks-first-lady-oberlin-
college-commencement-address.
noise that was generated at Middlebury College Peter Beinart, “A Violent Attack on Free Speech
at Middlebury,” Atlantic, March 6, 2017,
https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2017/03/middlebury-free-speech-violence/518667/.
“Watch industry leaders duke it out” “You’re Invited to DOSOMETHING.ORG’s 2016 Annual
Meeting,” www.dosomething.org, accessed September 20, 2017,
https://dsannualmeeting2016.splashthat.com.

beat one another up Thomas Morton, “Takanakuy,” Vice, March 12, 2012,
https://www.vice.com/sv/article/avnexa/takanakuy-part-1.
“‘sort it out there’” Ben C. Solomon, “Musangwe Fight Club: A Vicious Venda Tradition,” The
New York Times, February 26, 2016, https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/27/sports/musangwe-
fight-club-a-vicious-venda-tradition.html.
Chapter 8: Accept That There Is an End
experience, sense of meaning, and memory The behavioral psychologist Daniel Kahneman writes
and speaks extensively about what he calls our “remembering self” and our “experiencing self,”
and how they differ. In his 2010 TED Talk, he describes the difference between two patients
who undergo a colonoscopy treatment, and how the patient with the longer treatment (and
therefore who experiences a longer period of pain) reports a better experience than Patient A
(with the shorter treatment) because he experienced a better ending. “What defines a story are
changes, significant moments, and endings. Endings are very, very important,” he says. See
https://www.ted.com/talks/daniel_kahneman_the_riddle_of_experience_vs_memory?
language=de#t-383109. See also his original study on this work: Daniel Kahneman, Barbara L.
Fredrickson, Charles A. Schreiber, and Donald A. Redelmeier, “When More Pain Is Preferred to
Less: Adding a Better End,” Psychological Science 4, no. 6 (November 1993): 401–5.
“traditional funeral” “New Funeralwise.com Survey Shows Contrasting Funeral Choices,”
Funeralwise, December 8, 2010, https://www.funeralwise.com/about/press-releases/funeral-
choices-survey/.
“If you let it peter out, it’s death” Courtney Rubin, “Queen Elizabeth’s Party Planner Is Proud to
Wear $35 Shoes,” The New York Times, April 23, 2016,
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/24/style/queen-party-planner-lady-elizabeth-anson.html.
supposed to distrust, even hate Seeds of Peace, like many programs, has evolved over time to also
include teenagers from the United States and the United Kingdom. It also runs a two-and-a-half
week summer program for teenagers from the United States alone, as well as educators from the
communities of campers to engage in adult dialogue. For more information, see
https://www.seedsofpeace.org.

Index
The page numbers in this index refer to the printed version of this book. The link provided will take
you to the beginning of that print page. You may need to scroll forward from that location to find the
corresponding reference on your e-reader.
A. T. Kearney management consulting, 143
Abousteit, Nora, 41, 95–100, 105, 109, 133–34, 187
Abousteit, Osman, 41–42
Abramović, Marina, 165–67
Abu Dhabi (United Arab Emirates), 197–202, 210
Abyssinian Baptist Church (Harlem), 134
Adaptive Leadership, 75–76
African-Americans, 129
“Against Chill” (Massey), 73–74
#Agrapalooza, 157
Agrawal, Radha, 273–74
Ahmadinejad, Mahmoud, 63
Alamo Drafthouse, 83–85, 87, 92
Alcatel, 59–61
Alternative worlds, see Temporary alternative worlds
Anderson, Chris, 94
Anderson, James, 226
Anson, Elizabeth, 256
Apple, 132
Apture, 132
Arabs, xii, 49, 150, 267
Argentina, 117
Army, U.S., 67
Arthur, King, 51
Artist Is Present, The (Abramović), 165
“Artist Mixer,” 160
Asians, 129
Aspen (Colorado), 156, 159
Atlantic, The, 133
Austin (Texas), 82–83
Austin, N. D., 243
Authenticity, 46, 63, 96, 193–225, 279
approaches designed for, 202–10
at family gatherings, 217–20
openings promoting, 183–85, 220–22
priming for, 151, 194–201

risk management and, 223–24
speeches expressing, 202–10
in storytelling, 210–15, 222–23
stranger quotient for unleashing, 215–17
Authority, 36, 75–109
abdication of, 36, 75–77, 106–9
commitment to, 77–81
generous, see Generous authority
ungenerous, 100–109
AV equipment, xi
Babson College, 159
Baby showers, 8–9, 11, 20–21
Bachelor parties, 147–49, 170
Back to the Bay, 38–40, 46
Banaras Hindu University, 219
Bangkok, 140
Ban Ki-moon, 63
Baquet, Dean, 11–14
Barrett, Daniel, 191
Barrett, Felix, 147–49, 170
Battle of the Bands, 260
BBC, 60, 216
Bedolla, Toma, 203
Belgium, 52
Benedetto, Ida, 243
Benedict College, 89
Berman, Amanda, 5–8
Biddle, Eve, 160
Birthday parties, ix, xiii, xiv, 4, 8, 17, 270
rules for, 113, 216–17
venues for, 67, 166–67
Black and White Ball (New York), 91–92
Blair, Tony, 63
Board meetings, ix, xiii, 4, 144
Bobs, 43–45
Bonding, see Connecting
Bonnaroo, 53
Bono, 63
Boston, 128
Brahmins of, 118
Boulder (Colorado), 113
Box ritual, 183–85
Brainstorming, 24, 33, 67, 151, 156, 159
Brazil, 44
Brooklyn (New York), 4, 72, 161, 186
Brooklyn Brewery, 169
Brooklyn Heights Montessori School, 191
Bucharest, 122
Buddhism, xii, 251

Burma, 63
Bush, George W., 227
Butts, Calvin O., III, 134
Calabrese, Alex, 4, 6–7
Camino de Santiago (France and Spain), 57
Campbell, Robert Chodo, 251, 153
Canada, 202
Capote, Truman, 91–92
Carroll, Lewis, 165
Carter, Jimmy, 63
Catholic Church, 229
Catholic Youth Ministry Hub, 112
Cecchini, Dario, 179–80, 186, 256
Central Park (New York), 135
CEOs, 18, 36, 51, 54, 84, 89, 132, 198
Ce Soir Noir, 129
Change Agents Now (CAN), 208–10, 218
Charleston (South Carolina), 260
Château des Mesnuls, 59–61
Château Principle, 58–62
Chatham House Rule, 198
Chesterfield, Earl of, 118
China, 98
Christians, xiii, 118
evangelical, xii
Christmas parties, 114, 152–53
Chumbivilcas Province (Peru), 235
Churchill, Winston, 54
Circle of Friends, 268–70
Cirque du Soleil, 152
Citigroup, 59
Cleveland Institute of Music, 46
Clinton, Bill, 260
Clinton, Hillary, 63, 260
Clooney, George, 63
Closings, 116, 173, 205–6, 221, 245–81
connecting during, 259–62
dynamics of, 267–70
last call method of, 254–56
logistics as problem in, 246–48, 270–73
priming for, 250–54, 258
purpose recalled in, 28, 275–77
reentry phase of, 262–67
of rituals, 10, 185
rules for, 127, 131, 223, 235–36
significance of, 248–50
timing of, 256–58
CNN, 85
cognitive progressing restraints, 173

Cohen, Leonard, 201
Colombia, 278
Colorado, 113
Color Games reentry process, 264–65
Community building, xii, 159, 169, 242, 264, 270
Community Table, 159
Conferences, ix, x, xiv, 11, 52, 142, 172, 203, 220
closing sessions of, 245–48, 255, 259–60, 268
Fifteen Toasts dinners on sidelines of, 220–21
opening of, 174, 175, 184, 187–89
Opportunity Collaboration, 89–91
panels at, 228
priming for, 94, 161–62, 194–201
purposes of, 17–19
rules for, 81–82, 99–100, 112
social contract of, 156–57
Conflict, 52, 83, 117, 213, 258, 262–63
aversion to, 72
group dialogues to resolve, 149–50
racial, 48–49
over social contracts, 155–56
See also Controversy
Conflict resolution professionals, xi, xii, 263
Connecting, 3, 22, 29–30, 32–33, 37, 42–43
authenticity in, 195, 203, 206–7, 209–11, 222
authority and, 92–99
in closings, 253, 259–62, 277, 279
through controversy, 225, 233, 239
failed, x–xi, 2, 103, 105, 108–9, 112
inclusion versus exclusion and, 42–43, 48, 53, 56, 64
openings encouraging, 174, 183–90
priming for, 155, 159–60
in temporary alternative worlds, 122–31, 143–44
Contention, see Controversy
Controversy, 43–45, 143, 168, 225–44
avoidance of, 226–29, 233
benefits versus risks of, 243–44
ground rules for, 236–43
purpose and, 40, 229–33
structures for generating, 233–36
See also Conflict
“Conversation Menu” (Zeldin), 217
Cooke, Ed, 67
CraftJam, 95
Creativity, xiv, 108, 113, 125, 140, 151, 187, 191, 274
Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young, 200
Cunningham, Amy, 277, 279
Dance parties, 69, 116, 135, 151–52, 161, 257, 273
Daoists, 138

Davis, Deborah, 91
Davos (Switzerland), 194
Daybreaker, 273–74
Dean, Will, 182–83
Decision making, 1, 4, 19–20, 24, 25, 49, 59, 82
in closings, 257–58
group, 231–32, 238
impediments to, 80, 132, 143–44
purpose and, 31–32, 34, 49, 90, 111, 145
stories about, 209, 212
Democratic Party, 171
Denmark, 202
Departure, see Endings
Detroit, 161, 270
Dialogues, xi–xii, 102, 149
racial, 48–49
Digital workbooks, 154–55, 238
Dîner en Blanc, 122–31
Dinner parties, ix, 8, 52, 62, 100–101, 123, 146, 188
etiquette at, 88–89, 117, 121
flash mob, 122–31
last calls at, 255–56
purpose of, 27–29, 31, 275
social contracts for, 156
toasts at, 198–201
venues for, 62, 69, 71–72, 79
Diplomacy, 48, 88, 149–51
Directors Guild of America, 176–77
Disagreement, see Controversy
Diversity, 45–51, 119, 129, 260
Dolnick, Sam, 13
Doorways, 164, 168, 169
DoSomething.org, 234
Dunbar, Robin, 53
Dunne, Griffin, 184
Duplass, Jay, 184
Düsseldorf, 125
Egypt, 95, 97, 262
Elizabeth II, Queen of England, 256
Ellison, Koshin Paley, 251–54
Embodiment, 22, 55–58, 61, 68, 176, 190–91, 235, 276
Endings, see Closings
England, 226
“Enter Sandman” (Metallica), 264
Etiquette, x, 114, 116–21
rules versus, 125–28, 131–33
Etiquette (Post), 226
Evangelical Christians, xii
Event planners, x, xi, xiv, 68, 244

Evite, 112
Exclusion, 36–49, 85, 114, 120, 161
diversity activated by, 45–49
kindness of, 36–40
Facebook, 127–28, 132, 137
Facilitators, xi, 43, 50–52, 54, 146, 172
methods of, 197, 223–24, 247
rules of, 143, 240
venues beneficial for, 57, 62
Family reunions, ix, 45, 215, 245, 267
Fermor, Patrick Leigh, 62
15 Toasts format, 202–5, 211–13, 215–18, 220–21, 224, 239
Fight Club (movie), 235
Fit, 11, 16, 18, 42, 160
Flash mob dinner parties, see Dîner en Blanc
“For a New Beginning” (O’Donohue), 276
Four Seasons, 178
France, 35–36, 57, 59–61, 122, 126, 216
Freemasons, 226, 228
French Polynesia, 122
“Friendsgiving,” 234
Frick, Patrick, 54
Funerals, ix, xiv, 2, 157, 173–75, 251–52, 277, 279
Gaddafi, Muammar, 63
Garden City (Kansas), 91
Gastonia (North Carolina), 115
Gays, see LGBT people
Gelles, Alison, 261
Generous authority, 81–100, 136–38
commitment to, 97–99
connection process in, 92–97
equalization through, 87–92, 96
protection of guests with, 83–87, 95–96
rules for, 99–100
George, Bill, 208–9
George Washington University School of Business, 276–77
Gergen, David, 85–86
Germany, 41, 95, 97, 121, 125, 214
Giessen (Germany), 41
Glassdoor, 227
Golden Gate National Parks Conservancy, 67–68
Golden Retriever Festival, 31
Goldman, Jesse, 272
Google, 132–33, 137
Government officials, xii, 72, 149–50, 161
Graham, Katharine, 91
Grand Paradise, The (Third Rail Projects), 164
Greece, 62

ancient, 116–17
Green, Duncan, x
Green, George Dawes, 210–12
Greenberger, Rachel, 159
Greeting, see Welcoming
Group dialogues, xi, xii, 40
Guardian, x
Guggenheim Museum, 166
Haiti, 125
Hamburg (Germany), 121
“Happy Hour,” 160
Harris, Shane, 129–30
Harris, Tristan, 132–33
Harvard University
Business School, 208
Kennedy School, 75, 207–8
Heat, see Controversy
Heiferman, Scott, 18
Heifetz, Ronald, 75–76, 81
Hill, Thomas Edie, 226
Hilton Head (South Carolina), 260
Hinduism, xii, 10, 21
Hjelm, Christina, 184–85
Hollywood Hills, 57
Hollywood Reporter, The, 184
Holtrop, Bernardus, 222–23
Honesty, see Authenticity
House of Genius, 113, 121, 203–4
Housekeeping, see Logistics
How to Plan a Great Event in 60 Days (Isip), 147
How We Gather (Thurston and ter Kuile), x
Huffington, Arianna, 168
“I Am Here” days, 133–39, 159
Identity, 9, 18, 38, 120, 216, 237–38, 267
group, 11, 33, 246, 264–65
transformative, 9, 268
“If These Were My Last Remarks” closing session, 261–63
Illinois, 89
I Love Dick (television series), 183, 184
Immersive theater, 148, 164–65
Impact Hub Los Angeles, 86–87
Inclusion, 50, 85, 137, 140, 206
excessive, 36, 38, 48
In Cold Blood (Capote), 91
India, xi, xii, 10, 217–20, 262
Tamil tribes in, 118
Influencer Salon, 112–13
Initiative for Track II Dialogues, 149

Instagram, 139
International Monetary Fund, 227
Internet, 111–12
Invitations, xi, 29–30, 34, 88, 103, 116–17, 156, 248, 260
authenticity and, 188–89, 195–96, 203–4, 220–22
to campus speakers, controversies about, 227–28
equalization and, 88–92
for forging connections, 92–94
inclusive versus exclusive, 35–53
openings and, 166–68, 171
priming role of, 152, 155, 157–63
to rule-based events, 112–14, 123–28, 135–37, 216–17
venue considerations for, 53–69
Iowa, xi, 117
Iran, 63
Ishihara, Kumi, 125–28, 130–31
Isip, Rashelle, 147
Islam, xii, 150
Israel, 262, 267
Istanbul, 18
Italy, 179
Ixtapa (Mexico), 89
Jaipur, maharani of, 91
Jamaica, 125, 275–76
Japan
Dîner en Blanc in, 125–31
tea ceremonies in, xiv, 19, 168
Jefferson, Thomas, 88
Jeffersonian Dinner, 113, 121
Jesus, 51
Jews, 49, 118, 138
See also Judaism
Johns Hopkins Hospital, 187
Jones, John, 47
Jordan, 262
Judaism, xiii, 19, 279
Judson Manor, 46–48
Jungian psychology, 214–15
Junior Cotillions, 114–16, 118–20
National League of, 115, 119
Kalamata (Greece), 62
Kansas, 91
Kenya, 186
Kigali, 122
Kindles, 160–61
Kingston, 122
Kyoto (Japan), 19

Lader, Philip and Linda, 260
Lagarde, Christine, 227
Landecker, Amy, 184, 185
Laprise, Michel, 152–53
Las Vegas, 140
Latinos, 129
Latitude Society, 143
Launching process, see Openings
Laudicina, Paul, 143–44
Law of Two Feet, 142–43
Lazarus, Lisa, 208–10
Leadership, 12–14, 32, 36, 75–76, 195, 208
League, Tim, 84
Lebanon, civil war in, 149
Leberecht, Tim, 196, 198, 213
Levit, Igor, 166
Levy, Clifford, 15–16
Lewin, Leslie, 263
LGBT people, 18, 40, 49, 100, 129, 237
Libya, 64
“Life as Seeds” closing event, 265–66
Lim, Leng, 224
Lincolnton (North Carolina), 115
LinkedIn, 272
Locations, see Venues
Logistics, x–xi, 9, 53, 79, 146–47
in openings and closings, 173–78, 245–46, 270–73
London, 18, 125, 147, 216–17
Los Angeles, 57, 66, 86–87
Louis XIII, King of France, 60
Lucas, George, 176–77
Lucent, 59–61
Lyall, Sarah, 161
Lysette, Trace, 184
Mac, Billy, 68–69
Macbeth (Shakespeare), 148
Macy’s department store, 273
Maine, 262
Marx, Groucho, 180
Massachusetts, 159
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Media Lab, 81
Massey, Alana, 73–74
Massey, Kyle, 12
Mecca, 53
Medici, Daisy, 82
Meeteor app, 24
Meetup, 17–18
Melville, Herman, 178
Merkel, Angela, 63

Merry, Anthony, 88
Metallica, 264
Mexico, 89–90
Microsoft, 175
Middlebury College, 228
Middle East Institute, 149
Million Man March, 53
Minneapolis, 246
Moby-Dick (Melville), 178
Modesty, 27–29, 61
Monterey (California), 81
Moth, The, 210–12
Mugabe, Robert, 63
Multitasking, 27–28
Murray, Charles, 228
Museum of the City of New York, 134
Museum of Modern Art (MoMA; New York), 55–57, 165
Muslims, xiii, 167
Muyanga, Neo, 172–73, 248–49
Ndevana, Tshilidzi, 235
Negroponte, Nicholas, 81–82
Netherlands, 35, 47
Networking, 2–4, 12, 51, 142, 156, 195–96, 203, 206
New Age, xii
New Jersey, 59, 61, 181
New Orleans, 113, 128, 273
New Year’s Eve, 260, 278
New York City, xiii, 64, 73, 91, 94, 95, 117, 148, 159, 164, 214, 273, 277
Dîner en Blanc in, 124, 125, 129
15 Toasts dinners in, 215–16
House of Genius gatherings in, 203–7
“I Am Here” days in, 133–39, 159
immersive theater in, 148, 164, 169
museums in, 55–57, 134, 167
risk-taking events in, 243–44
Zen Center for Contemplative Care in, 251
See also Brooklyn
New Yorker, The, 63
New York Times, The, 7, 11–16, 60, 62, 92, 148, 162, 235, 257
Night Heron, 243
90 percent rule, 149–52
Non-governmental organizations (NGOs), xii, 275
North Carolina, 115
University of, at Charlotte, 149
Obama, Barack, 38, 63, 89, 101–3
Obama, Michelle, 227
O’Donohue, John, 276
Ohio, 46

Olympics, 53
“On Children” (Sweet Honey in the Rock), 200
Onion, The, 57
Ono, Yoko, 63
Openings, 100, 172–91, 193, 197, 254, 278
connecting in, 181–91
honor and awe in, 178–81
priming for, 155–63, 220
problems to avoid in, 173–75, 178, 245–46, 270–71
sponsors in, 174–77, 246
ushering through thresholds into, 163–72, 277
Open Space Technology, 142
Opportunity Collaboration conference, 89–90
Ortmann, David M., 214–15
Otisfield (Maine), 262
Owen, Harrison, 142–43
Oxford University, 216
Pakistan, 262
Palais-Royal (Paris), 123
Palestine, 262
Panels, 85–86, 93, 189, 228, 255, 261
Panzano (Italy), 179
Parc de Bagatelle (Paris), 122–23
Paris, 122–23
Park Avenue Armory (New York), 166
Participatory theater, 162, 164
Parties, x, 66–69, 72–73, 86–87, 90–92, 96–97, 168–70, 199–200, 222
endings of, 248–50, 255–57, 279
holiday, 114, 152–53, 185–86, 260
logistics versus guests’ experience as focus of, 146–49
See also Birthday parties; Dance Parties; Dinner parties
Parvin, Daniel, 48
Pasquier, François, 122
Passageways, 164–70, 185
Passover Principle, 19, 128, 157
Perel, Esther, 189
Performance art, xiv, 103, 165
Pergam, Andrew, 188–89
Personal Democracy Forum, 175–76
Peru, 235
Philadelphia, 171
Pignatelli, Luciana, 91
Pinterest, 8
Platon, 63–65
Plaza Hotel (New York), 91
Polynesia, French, 122
Pont des Arts (Paris), 123
Port-au-Prince, 125
Post, Emily, 226, 228

PowerPoints, xi
“Praxis” facilitators, 143
Pregame, see Priming process
Presidio (San Francisco), 67–68
Priming, 145–63, 170, 182, 240, 258
methods of, 94, 96, 150, 152–55, 194–201
by naming event,158–61
90 percent rule for, 149–52
social contract in, 155–58
to sustain interest, 161–63
Princeton University, 278
Psychological threshold, 169–71
Punchdrunk theater company, 148
Purpose, xi, 16–34, 71, 106, 111, 185, 194–96, 227
categories differentiated from, 2–4
in closings, 261, 264, 269, 275–77, 280
commitment to, 1, 16–21
controversy and, 40, 229–34
crafting, 21–27
decision making and, 31–32, 34, 49, 90, 111, 145
failure to achieve, 90, 102
generous versus ungenerous authority in realization of, 75, 77, 81, 85, 90, 102, 105
inclusions and exclusions determined by, 35–53
in openings, 175, 191
priming for, 154–55, 157, 160
problems due to lack of, 27–31
rules supporting, 121, 142–44, 205, 218
venues appropriate for, 53–69
Pussy Riot, 63
Putin, Vladimir, 63
Quakers, xiv
Quora, 227
Racial issues, xii, 46, 48–49, 261
Rasiej, Andrew, 175
Reagan, Ronald, 115
Realness, see Authenticity
Red Hook Community Justice Center, 4–8, 16, 21
Regent’s Park (London), 216–17
Renaissance Weekends, 260–62
Republicans, 49
Retreats, 29, 140, 267
Reunions, ix, 45, 58, 73, 215, 245, 267
Rhythm 0 (Abramović), 165
Rice, Condoleezza, 227
Rikyū, Sen no, 19
Ritualized gatherings, 8–16, 19, 40, 135, 157, 234–36, 279
openings of, 167, 182–85
See also Funerals; Weddings

Rocky (movie), 230, 232
Royal Institute of International Affairs, 198
Roychowdhury, Sugata, 180
RSVPs, 114
Rules, 7, 41, 101, 112–45, 198, 203–5, 228
for addictive technology use, 131–33
for closings, 262, 280–81
for controversy, 230–31, 234–36, 240–41
etiquette versus, 118–22, 131, 140–42
for exclusion, 36, 40–41
at family gatherings, 217–20
generous authority and, 77–78, 81–82. 84–87, 92, 96
invitations including, 112–14, 122–28, 134–37, 216–17
priming for, 149–52
for venues, 65, 68
Russia, 63
Rutgers University, 227
Sanders, Bernie, “Future to Believe In” rally, 171–72
San Francisco, 67, 143
Saturday Night Live (television series), 177
Sawyer, Dave, 248
Schacht, Henry, 60
Schumer, Amy, 82
Scotland, 31
Seeds of Peace, 262–67
Seinfeld (television series), 16
Seinfeld, Jerry, 54
Sextantworks, 243
Sexual Outsiders: Understanding BDSM Sexualities and Communities (Ortmann), 214
Shakespeare, William, 148
SheKnows.com, 111
Shiva, xiii
Singapore, 122, 125, 128, 258
Singing rule, 198, 218, 223
Size of gatherings, 45, 50–53, 69, 92–93, 98, 105, 123, 256, 260
See also 15 Toasts format
Sleep No More (Barrett), 148
Slim, Randa, 149–51
Smith, Michael J., 249
Smith College, 227
Snapchat, 137
Snowden, Edward, 63
Social contract, 141, 155–58
Social Good cage fight, 234
Social Innovation and Civic Participation, Office of, 101–2
Social media, 234
Soloway, Jill, 183–85, 190
South Africa, 172, 202, 235
South Carolina, 202, 260

South Dakota, xi
South by Southwest Conference, 99
Spark Camp, 52, 187–89
Spirituality, x, xi, 124, 250
Stanhope, John, 118
Star Wars (movie), 176–77
Star Wars: The Force Awakens (movie), 160–61
State of Enterprise Work survey, x
State of Friendship in America 2013: A Crisis in Confidence, The, x
Stewart, Elizabeth, 86–87
Stewart, Katie, 186
Stewart, Mamie Kanfer, 23
Stewart, Martha, 146–47, 158
Stockholm, 117
Strangers, 22, 76, 79, 88, 197, 237, 273
authenticity with, 207, 213, 215–17
rules on interactions with, 112, 126–27, 130, 138, 143, 203–4, 244
welcoming, 153, 168, 179
Supreme Court, 50
Sustained Dialogue, xii, 48–49, 51
Suu Kyi, Aung San, 63
Sweet Honey in the Rock, 200
Taboos, 234, 237, 239, 241, 244
Tahrir Square, 53, 63
Tamil tribes, 118
“Teach Your Children” (Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young), 200
TED conferences, 81, 83, 94, 259
Temporary alternative worlds, 111–44, 234, 249, 262, 267–69
examples of, 122–25, 133–44, 164–65
rules for, 112–122, 125–33
Ter Kuile, Casper, x
Thailand, 140–43
Thanksgiving dinners, 24–25, 118
“Thanksgiving problem,” 234
Thank-yous, see Logistics
Then She Fell (Third Rail Projects), 164, 165
Third Rail Projects, 164–65
Thomas Jefferson Encyclopedia, The, 88
Thurston, Angie, x
Thurston, Baratunde, 138–39, 169, 185–87, 259
Time magazine, 63
Time Out magazine, 129
Timothy Convention, 243–44
Tokyo, 125, 128–31
Toledo (Ohio), 18
Tough Mudder, 181–83
Town halls, ix, 4, 90, 174, 228
Transparent (television series), 183, 184
Treasury Department, U.S., 102

Tribes, 23, 53–54, 98, 118, 124–25, 169, 181
familial, 20, 38, 82
fusing, 181, 184–85, 262
rules for gatherings of, 124–25, 138
See also Connecting
Trocadéro (Paris), 123
True North (George), 209
Trump, Donald, 63, 211
Tsao, Tai, 23
Tshifudi (South Africa), 235
Tweedmouth, Lord, 31
Uniqueness, 17–20, 25, 32, 157, 186
United Arab Emirates (UAE), 194–95
United Kingdom, 217, 236
United Nations, 63, 64
United States, 88, 92, 115, 148, 149, 154
funerals in, 251–52
philanthropy in, 246
Ushering, 163–72, 254, 256, 279
missed opportunities for, 171–72
psychological threshold of, 169–71
through passageways and doorways, 164–69
Vancouver, 94, 129
Varelas, Chris, 59–61
Venda tribe, 235
Venues, 13, 19, 53–69, 123–24, 166, 169–70, 174, 228
area of, 67–68
Château Principle of, 58–62
density in, 68–69
displacement in, 61–64
embodiment in, 55–57
perimeter of, 65–66
switching rooms in, 66–67
See also names of specific venues
Vermont, 171
Virginia, xi, 114
University of, xii, 48–49, 249–50
Visioning Labs, 160, 189, 278–79
Vulnerability, 195–96, 200, 206–8, 211–13, 215, 223, 262
Waldorf Astoria Hotel, 244
Wall Street Journal, The, 60
Walt Disney Company, 160–61
Warncke, Stefanie Zoe, 214–15
Washington, D.C., 72, 88, 128–30, 149, 181, 208
Washington Post, The, 91, 276
Wassaic Project, 160
Waterloo (Iowa), 117

Weddings, ix, 8, 10, 11, 94, 140, 146, 168, 250, 257–58, 271
number of guests at, 52–53
purpose of, 19–21
rules for, 97–98, 113
Welcoming, 1, 43, 96, 103, 134, 170, 178, 245, 257–58
absence of, 75–76, 100
to dinner parties, 107, 153, 168, 198, 220–21
to closings, 250, 254, 264
purpose and, 17, 18, 205
Werewolf game, 73
WhatsApp, 251
White House
Office of Public Engagement, 102
Office of Social Innovation and Civic Participation, 161
Wilkins, Topher, 89–90
Williams, Tim, 203
Winters, Ann Colvin, 115
Wisdump, 112
Woon, Wendy, 55–57, 62, 63
Workbooks, digital, 154–55, 238
Workshops, 4, 57, 67, 143, 159, 247
World Bank, 200
World Cup, 53
World Economic Forum (WEF), 194–201
Global Agenda Council on New Models of Leadership, 195–201
Wurman, Richard Saul, 81–82
Young Presidents’ Organization, 51
YouTube, 230
Zeldin, Theodore, 216–17
Zen Buddhism, 251
Zen Center for Contemplative Care, 251–54
Zimbabwe, xi, xii, 63
Zimmerman, Eric, 66
Zulu tribe, 183

About the Author
© Mackenzie Stroh
Priya Parker is the founder of Thrive Labs, at which she helps activists,
elected officials, corporate executives, educators, and philanthropists create
transformative gatherings. Trained in the field of conflict resolution, Parker
has worked on race relations on American college campuses and on peace
processes in the Arab world, southern Africa, and India. She studied
organizational design at M.I.T., public policy at the Harvard Kennedy
School, and political and social thought at the University of Virginia. She
lives in Brooklyn, New York.
thrivelabs.co
 priyaparker
 priyaparker

Wat’s next on
your reading list?
Discover your next
great read!
Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author.
Sign up now.
