See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/347858930
The Art of Facilitation
Chapter · January 2021
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-54584-0_12
CITATIONS
2
READS
256
1 author:
Jan Marie Fritz
University of Cincinnati
98 PUBLICATIONS   506 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Jan Marie Fritz on 08 September 2024.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Chapter 9
The Art of Facilitation
Jan Marie Fritz
Introduction
There are a number of ways to successfully facilitate (assist a group with)
activities. Facilitators are expected to learn different techniques/styles/methods such
as probing, reframing, positive reinforcement, design, use of resources,1 problem
analysis (Hartwig 2010, pp. 18–19), and methods of decision-making. The use of
such techniques is only a part of a facilitated activity; facilitation is an art,2 a creative
undertaking in which the facilitator needs to continually act,3 focusing on what is
currently happening while taking into account a group’s setting, participants, aims,
relevant history, current situation and future opportunities. This chapter discusses
the creative facilitation of meetings and provides a case study which points to some
of the problems that can develop when not enough attention is given to effective
facilitation.
1Nielsen (2012, p. 87) wrote about how “a range of semiotic resources (whiteboard, colored cards,
speed markers, re-usable adhesive putty, body posture, gestures, gazes, pauses and talk) is used in
a facilitated meeting.
2Shaw et al. (2010, p. 4) indicated “the true art of an effective facilitator is often not always about
the methods, tools or techniques that they employ but on the internal condition of the facilitator”
which allows the facilitator to “create transformation in groups.”
3According to Shaw et al. (2010, p. 4), “as scholars and practicing facilitators have emphasized,
facilitators work intuitively, and often need to act in the moment : : : deciding if, when and how to
intervene : : : ”
J.M. Fritz ()
Professor, University of Cincinnati, USA and Senior Research Fellow, Centre for Sociological
Research, University of Johannesburg, South Africa
e-mail: jan.fritz@uc.edu
J.M. Fritz (ed.), Moving Toward a Just Peace: The Mediation Continuum,
Clinical Sociology: Research and Practice, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-2885-1 9,
© Springer ScienceCBusiness Media Dordrecht 2014
149

150
J.M. Fritz
Deﬁning Facilitation
The term facilitation basically refers to the act of making something easy or, at least,
easier. The concept is known in many countries, but not all. Japan, for instance, has
no word for facilitation in Japanese, but the idea of facilitation, particularly in the
areas of education and training, is “increasingly gaining attention and acceptance”
(Kato 2010, p. 694).
Because facilitation is such a general term, one ﬁnds it used in different ways in
many ﬁelds including neuroscience (increase in postsynaptic potential evoked by a
second impulse), business (running meetings), ecology (for instance, when a plant
provides shade for a seedling) as well as areas such as human trafﬁcking (facilitators
are the people who are engaged in illegal trafﬁcking across international borders).
There also are “practice facilitators” (PFs) who are health care professionals – in
England, the Netherlands, Australia, Canada and the US – who assist primary care
clinicians with “a variety of activities, including enhancement of documentation and
delivery of clinical interventions, particularly preventive services; improvement of
ofﬁce systems; and implementation of Health Information Technology” (Nagykaldi
et al. 2005, p. 583). There is “facilitative dialogue” (Smock and Serwer 2012,
pp. 1–2), a conversation, moderated by a third-party, to help those involved in a
discussion overcome any barriers to effective communication. While this approach
can be used in many situations, Smock and Serwer (2012) discuss its use in conﬂict
and post-conﬂict areas.4 And “facilitative leadership,” “a skilled approach to leading
that’s based on the core beliefs and practices of group facilitation” (Bens 2006, p. 8),
is frequently discussed (e.g., Kato 2010, p. 694; Fryer 2012; Subramaniam 2011).
Finally, there is “guerilla facilitation,” techniques to be used by a meeting participant
when a meeting is not going well and the participant is not managing the meeting
(Wilkinson n.d.).
Facilitation is a concept that is frequently used by mediators and many others
to characterize some or all of the work they do. Haskell and Cyr (2011, p. 5)
deﬁned facilitation, in a group facilitation journal, “as the design and management
of structures and processes that help a group do its work and minimize the common
problems people have working together.” Amnesty International (2011, p. 20), in its
training manual about facilitation, has provided a useful deﬁnition of the term that
has much less of a management focus:
Generally speaking, facilitation is deﬁned as making things occur easily, or making
something possible. Facilitation is an enabling and guiding process which creates and
supports a space for purposeful engagement and participation.
Mie Femø Nielsen (2012, p. 89) indicated that a facilitator is a “content neutral”
person “working to enable : : : [a group or organization] to collaborate, work more
4Smock and Serwer (2012, p. 2) indicate that the three components of facilitated dialogue in
conﬂict and post-conﬂict situations are (1) being sensitive to situations and intervening as needed
to make conversations productive, (2) focusing on underlying interests and (3) organizing topics to
achieve early consensus on less-difﬁcult topics.

9
The Art of Facilitation
151
effectively and achieve synergy,” or to think in a deeper way about its assumptions,
beliefs, values, processes, or other areas by using a rather informal, ﬂexible
alternative “to constricting formats like parliamentary procedure or Robert’s Rules
of Order.”5 Facilitators LISTEN, encourage participation, draw out the opinions of
participants, ask questions, clarify communication, keep a meeting on task, guide
groups through difﬁcult discussions, test assumptions, are optimistic, give as well
as receive feedback, have no substantive decision-making authority and periodically
summarize progress.
In discussing facilitation, there are differences of opinion about where one
usually ﬁnds facilitation being used and how it should be done. According to
Nielsen (2012, p. 89), for instance, facilitators “are frequently used in innovation
projects and change management projects; but usually not used in ‘ordinary,’
intraorganizational idea development meetings.” Others would think facilitation is
also valuable in idea development meetings. And according to Smock and Serwer
(2012, p. 163), a skilled facilitator in conﬂict zones should be “actively engaged in
directing the discussion and helping the participants reach consensus;” this kind of
facilitator would not be a “neutral trafﬁc cop.” Others might see this as an option
in many kinds of facilitation (not just in conﬂict zones) while some others might
think that this characterization opens the door to a facilitator being directive or
opinionated.
Stephen Thorpe, in an editorial for Group Facilitation (2011, p. 3) lovingly
described the role of the facilitator:
A facilitator “in the moment” might be likened to the metaphor of a swan that skillfully and
gracefully glides on the surface of a pond: guiding the group towards their purpose, making
subtle interventions, and cutting through blockages and conﬂict with precision. The group
[members] may ﬁnd that they are achieving [the group’s] goals, are becoming empowered,
and participants are amazed at how easy it all seemed to ﬂow – even through those tough
bits they had been avoiding. Yet, just beneath the surface of the water, that facilitator’s feet
are paddling away, drawing on a number of inner resources, picking up on subtle currents
and bringing deeper awareness to all that is happening. This I call the inner practice of a
group facilitator : : : There is a need now : : : to further expore and write about these subtle
aspects of the group facilitator role : : : [so that others] can truly see the magic in the things
we are : : : doing while we are facilitating.
Amnesty International (2011, p. 22) emphasized that a facilitator’s qualities
include “resourcefulness and creativity:”
Each group is as different as the people who make it up. A good facilitator needs an
overall programme and objectives but may also adapt these to ﬁt changing conditions and
opportunities : : :
5Robert’s Rules of Order is a widely used parliamentary authority in the U.S. The ﬁrst edition of
the procedures was published in 1876.

152
J.M. Fritz
Mediation and Facilitation
Mediation is a humanistic and creative process in which one or more impartial
individuals help disputants discuss an issue or issues that concern one or more
of the parties. This process is sometimes referred to as facilitated negotiation.
The mediator will establish an open, trusting environment in which parties are
encouraged to discuss the facts of the matter as well as their personal feelings
about the issue or issues that brought them to the table. Mediation is usually
problem-centered with a ﬂexibly-structured process that can be free ﬂowing or
rather controlled or directed. If the outcome of this process is an agreement, it would
be shaped by the parties and mutually satisfactory.
The U.S. Institute for Environmental Conﬂict Resolution (n.d.) indicates that
mediation and facilitation “are the cornerstone of the U.S. Institute’s services.” The
Institute indicates that mediation is a negotiation process in which “‘resolution’ is
the goal” while facilitation is a collaborative process that aims to “seek a shared
understanding of the issues at hand, and to explore how they might work together
to meet their common goals.” The Institute’s deﬁnition tries to draw a strong line
between the two processes : : : but that is actually hard to do. Both mediation
and facilitation can be broadly deﬁned and are overlapping. For instance, New
Zealand’s guidance note (Sefton 2009) for environmental disputes sees the role of
mediator and facilitator as the same except that “outcomes of facilitated meetings
are summarized at the conclusion” and “at closure, the agreement of a mediation is
nailed.”
Mediators, for a number of reasons, may refer to some or all of their work as
facilitation. It may be that the term mediation is not understood by most or some
segment of the public or it may be that some think if the term “mediation” is used
that it means there is a severe problem. Facilitation may be a more acceptable
term for those reasons. Also, a mediator may feel that the work she or he is
doing – perhaps because it involves many people or a number of groups6 – really is
facilitation, although she or he uses many mediation skills.
Mediators in the U.S. who regularly work with large groups usually have
been trained in and have experience with facilitation. However, not all mediators
(particularly those working with individuals or small groups) have been trained
in facilitation. Increasingly, there has been an interest in and opportunities for
these mediators to have this training. For instance, some large civic discussions
(e.g., about national health options or problems facing women who wish to fully
participate in society) offered facilitation training to mediators and asked them to
serve as table or group facilitators. Also, special education mediators in the U.S.
6According to The State of Queensland, Department of Justice and Attorney-General (Australia)
(n.d.), “mediation doesn’t usually involve large numbers of people : : : [and] facilitation is used
for large-scale disputes, often involving several parties, an organization, a department or entire
community.”

9
The Art of Facilitation
153
are being trained or have been trained by a number of state education departments
to serve as facilitators. These individuals are increasingly being made available
to school systems to run meetings or develop models for running meetings when
parents and school system representatives are trying to develop an individualized
education plan for a student with special needs. The thinking is that if the initial
meetings between parents and school system representatives are successful, there
will be less problems in the future and less need to have mediators deal with special
education disputes.
Mediators and facilitators often belong to the same professional organizations.
They may be active, for instance, in the International Association of Facilitators or
the Environment and Public Policy Section (or other sections) of the Association for
Conﬂict Resolution. The US Institute for Environmental Conﬂict Resolution (n.d.)
frequently uses “contracted private-sector” mediators and facilitators in addition to
its own small staff in dealing with environmental disputes. The Institute maintains
a national roster of dispute resolution and consensus building professionals who all
are third-party professional facilitators and/or mediators.
The selection of mediators and facilitators generally should be acceptable to
all the members of the groups. However, sometimes mediators and facilitators are
assigned and it is only after assignment that a person or organization might question
if the person is appropriate for the assignment.
Both mediation and facilitation involve creativity. The situations of groups
involved in mediation and facilitation may often be unclearly deﬁned (what have
been called “ill-deﬁned domains”). Particularly when that is the case, creativity may
not just be a contribution of the mediator or facilitator; the creativity may be in the
collaboration/sharing of the participants as well as the contributions of the facilitator
or mediator (see Reilly 2008).
Novice, Experienced and Artisan Facilitation
Facilitators may not be needed in particular situations. The authors of a book
about collaboration (Dukes and Firehock 2001, p. 29) noted that when a group
has low conﬂict and “the meeting process is not terribly demanding,” a meeting
can be managed by a chair or a member of the group. And Andy Williams (2012,
p. 137) studied student learning when an open facilitation approach was used
regarding “solo camping” (camping on your own). He concluded (p. 153) “that
soloists can and do attach important meanings to their experiences without the
need for a facilitator to guide or structure the learning process on their behalf.”
Williams (p. 154) underlined, however, that he was not saying that “facilitator-led
solo activities should become a thing of the past” but, rather, that all should be aware
of the “potential of a more open mode of facilitation (a learner-centered approach in)
which participants (solo campers) have more ownership of the process and outcomes
of their own learning because facilitators were encouraged to take a step back.”

154
J.M. Fritz
When facilitation can be useful, what level of facilitation skill is needed?
Facilitators do have different levels of expertise (see, for example, Bens 2000,
p. 35; Rees 2005, pp. 261–283).7 Modifying Berkvens’ typology of facilitators
(2012, p. 360), this chapter discusses the following levels: novice facilitator (little
or no training in facilitation; uses more authoritarian style that she or he probably
has experienced without checking the backgrounds and needs of participants; no
continuing support offered to participants); experienced facilitator (training, some
experience after training and some feedback from more experienced facilitators; has
thought about background and needs of participants and sometimes has done a needs
assessment; provides support for participants by asking how they are doing) and
artisan facilitator (has training and periodically is given feedback by experienced
and artisan facilitators; can use many different techniques in facilitating meetings;
continually adjusts what is being done by taking into account the context and needs
of participants; optimizes full participation of all participants). Holborn (2002),
Hogan (2002), and Jenkins (2004) have noted the complex skills (such as clear
communication, neutrality, process and participation skills) required in facilitation.
All levels of facilitation require not only continuing training and/or discussion of
facilitations, but also ongoing support and resources.
Amnesty International (2011, pp. 20–22) discussed experienced and particularly
artisan facilitation when it described what facilitators should do:
– Promote inclusion and active participation of all members of the group.
– Promote dialogue in a constructive way.
– Emphasize process, as well as outcomes.
– Manage tensions.
– Recognize and address power imbalances.
– Inspire!
Is there any evidence that experienced and artisan facilitation is better than
novice facilitation? The general expectation is that experienced or artisan facilitation
is better. Dukes and Firehock (2001, p. 30), based on their experience with
environmental conﬂicts, noted that “the more diverse the group, the greater the
scope of the group’s purpose and potential impact, and the more complex or
conﬂictual the issues, then the more likely you will need a skilled and experienced
facilitator or mediator who will take an active role in all elements of the group’s
process.” Espiner and Hartnett (2011) also noted the value of a skilled facilitator. In
discussing person-centered facilitation of planning with adults who have intellectual
disabilities, they (Espiner and Hartnett 2011, p. 63) wrote that “the facilitation of a
person’s aspirations requires a skilled facilitator who is a clear communicator giving
priority to the aspirations and choices expressed by the person.” The researchers
7Shaw and his colleagues (2010, p. 5) have deﬁned intentional facilitator in the following way: “we
use the label ‘intentional’ to distinguish a purposeful (or formal or professional) facilitator from
one who facilitates a group meeting with only a tacit awareness of the reasons or motives behind
actions or with limited knowledge of facilitation tools and techniques.”

9
The Art of Facilitation
155
(Espiner and Hartnett 2011, p. 69) concluded that “skilled facilitation in the planning
process will be essential to honour the adult’s voice and to promote a greater sense
of ownership and control.” This study, however, did not discuss the different levels
of skilled facilitation.
Two studies are mentioned here because of their interest in both effectiveness
and different levels of facilitation. One study of electronic meetings – by Wong
and Aiken (2003, p. 125) – concluded that “automated facilitation was as good as
expert-human and better than novice-human facilitation for simple idea generation
and ranking tasks.” One of the big limitations of this study was that “no attempt was
made to automate more cognitively complex facilitation tasks such as ensuring that
parties are heard, that one ‘faction’ does not take over the meeting, that all ideas are
discussed fairly, intimidating or derisive comments are discouraged, and that new
ideas are considered.”
The other study – by Kolfschoten et al. (2007) – compared facilitators who
had different levels of experience. For their research (Kolfschoten et al. 2007,
p. 353) novice facilitators were those who had facilitated less than 25 workshops,
experienced facilitators had facilitated between 25 and 100 workshops and expert
facilitators had conducted over 100 workshops. The researchers (Kolfschoten et al.
2007, p. 347, 354, 359) concluded that “generally, the time to prepare diminishes
when experience increases,” novices and experienced facilitators regularly use less
(facilitation) techniques than experts,” “novices have less access to a consulting
team” and novices “are more likely to encounter surprises (e.g., unexpected
outcomes or conﬂict) yet they are less equipped to handle (by adapting their
facilitation designs) these surprises.”8 These ﬁndings lend support to the value of
experienced and artisan facilitation and also provide some suggestions about how
facilitation can be improved.
Steps to a Better Meeting
Facilitators, whether external (outside of the group making decisions) or internal
(a member of the group making decisions who is taking on the role of a facilitator),
are expected to improve the processes and outcomes of group meetings.9 The
meetings may differ in substantial ways such as the emotional connection of some
or all participants to issues being discussed, different power of participants, or
8Dukes and Firehock (2001, p. 32) noted that “a volunteer facilitator, or even a paid agency staff
person with minimum training, may not have the skills required to help parties negotiate the twists
and turns of a highly political and/or highly technical issue : : : Innocent mistakes by an untrained
person may result in parties leaving the group or other adverse outcomes.”
9Nielsen (2012, p. 89) indicates that “a workshop facilitator is often an external consultant, working
to organize and lead events like meetings, seminars, workshops and group sessions in order to help
their participants reach a certain goal or conclusion deﬁned in advance (by the participants or the
management).”

156
J.M. Fritz
group traditions including usual approaches to making decisions. The purpose
for the meeting also can be quite different. Retreats,10 for instance, may be for
developing a strategic plan, changing organizational culture, building relationships
or encouraging creativity/innovation. Because of these differences, no one set way
of facilitating a meeting is the only way to do things.
Even though meetings can be quite different, there are some general considera-
tions (e.g., Frediani 2009; Bens 2000, pp. 39–44; Doyle and Straus 1976) that can
be put forward as basic for most business-type meetings in the United States (with
varying applications in other countries). The following section of this chapter is
divided into ﬁve parts – before, beginning, during, ending and after the meeting.
Before the Meeting
1. Plan the meeting carefully. Meetings often require a great deal of advance
work. Among the questions to be answered: Who should attend? What will be
discussed? When will the meeting be held? (In some situations, the timing of
when a meeting will be held is extremely important.) Where will the meeting be
held? What will be the best seating arrangement for the meeting room? Will there
be refreshments? Why is the meeting being held? What is the desired outcome or
outcomes of the meeting? If a series of meetings might be needed, how many will
there be? Will the meeting be a safe environment? Will guests or the public be
invited/allowed/encouraged to attend the meeting? How much notice needs to be
provided before the meeting? Will a quorum be needed? Will Robert’s Rules of
Order (Robert 2011) or some other format need to be followed? Management
representatives (at the highest level) should be involved in the planning meeting
or meetings to make sure that there is agreement about the process, content and
goals.
2. Collect needed background information. This may involve interviews. (Some-
times you learn surprising information in individual interviews. In advance of a
small meeting, I learned that two participants had not spoken to each other in 10
years and that junior members of the work group were afraid to say anything in
front of senior people.) A review of documents (including records and accounts of
previous meetings) also may need to be undertaken. Some documents may need
to be distributed at and/or in advance of the meeting.
3. Prepare and send out a tentative agenda in advance of the meeting. The
tentative agenda should identify the kind of meeting that will be held, the
proposed topics for discussion and the tentative amount of time that will be
devoted to each item. (The facilitator’s copy of the draft agenda also should
include process notes indicating how each agenda item will be handled – e.g.,
each person will give one story, brief report from three people, or establish
10See, for instance, Retreats that Work (2006) by Liteman, Campbell and Liteman.

9
The Art of Facilitation
157
evaluation criteria.) Comments/suggestions should be invited about the topics,
the order of the topics and amount of time required for discussion. Depending on
responses, a revised agenda may need to be sent out in advance of the meeting.
4. Arrive early at the meeting site and set up the meeting room. Make sure that
there is sufﬁcient time to set up your room before your meeting begins. I have
found that sometimes arrangements made in advance do not result in what is
expected. Be prepared, for example, to move tables and locate extra seating.
5. Plan and check all technical aspects of the meeting. This should be done well
in advance of the meeting and again just before the meeting. Have plans in place
about what will be done in the event that some equipment is not there or does not
function.
6. Have a troubleshooter poised and in position. If you are greeting those attending
the meeting or are the facilitator, you probably will not have the possibility
of dealing with a security issue (e.g., threatening person) or other problem. It
always is best to have one or two people identiﬁed as troubleshooters who know
it is their job (if you indicate) to solve any problem that develops.
At the Beginning of the Meeting
7. Greet those attending the meeting. Make people feel welcome when entering
the meeting room and ask if they have any questions. This might be done just
before or at the beginning of the formal meeting or, if people are attending who
are not known to the facilitator, as each person enters the room. This might
be a point to ask what people are expecting from the meeting or why they are
attending. This gives the facilitator some sense of who is in the room and why
people are attending the meeting.
8. Identify the type of meeting. Indicate if the meeting will be, for instance, all
or in part informational, planning, advisory, relationship-building or decision-
making. This is good to do at a beginning of a meeting and also may need to be
done during the meeting.
9. Establish ground rules? Some meetings can progress very nicely without
establishing any ground rules. If ground rules or stated principles (e.g., conﬁ-
dentiality) are needed, they can be developed (with the help of the participants)
at the beginning of the meeting or at any point during the meeting.
10. Start on time. The announcement of the meeting and the agenda indicate the
starting and ending times for the meeting. Those attending generally expect that
these times are accurate.
11. Have participants introduce themselves and perhaps state their expectations
for the meeting. Don’t assume everyone knows everyone else. Set a process
in place that lets everyone hear what is being said but doesn’t let anyone
monopolize the introduction process. The last two meetings I attended were
problematic from the very beginning. In one a rather large number of peo-
ple were asked by the novice facilitator to introduce themselves (without a

158
J.M. Fritz
microphone) and nobody heard or understood the information because most
of the names and afﬁliations were mumbled. One of the meetings had people
introducing themselves with a microphone but the novice facilitator also asked
each person to say a little something about her or his project. Many of the
people talked for a rather long time about their projects while the novice
facilitator did nothing (but wring his hands and look pained) while this was
going on. Introductions can be a very good idea at the beginning of the meeting
but the approach that is used, the directions that are given and the handling
of this process by the facilitator are very important. (In a large meeting, it
may be that only small numbers of people can be given the opportunity to
introduce themselves to each other and/or people can introduce themselves as
they contribute to the meeting.)
12. Clearly deﬁne roles.11 The facilitator should use an approach that makes clear
the expectations for all those participating in a meeting. It may be that each
person is expected to speak and also that each person should encourage others
to contribute. Participants should understand the role of the facilitator and
whether a recorder (writing a public display of notes) will be used rather than a
secretary (with private notes). Who will be acting as the timekeeper? Will roles
possibly change (e.g., people sharing the recorder role) during the meeting?
If a top manager or ofﬁcial is there, what will be her or his role during the
meeting?
13. Review, revise, and order the agenda (including times). The agenda already
has been through at least one review and may have been resubmitted to those
attending the meeting. This would be a ﬁnal review, even though topics and
times still may be changed during the meeting.
14. Review action items, if any, from previous meetings. This can bring partici-
pants up-to-date, note accomplishments or progress, identify problems and help
bring closure on some issues.
15. Explain the process that will be used. In addition to explaining the roles of
those participating in the meeting, explain (or discuss) the process that will
be used for any discussion and decision-making (e.g., ranking and evaluating,
multi-voting, ranking/prioritizing, nominal group, force-ﬁeld analysis).
During the Meeting
16. Focus on an issue (all in the same way and the same time). The facilitator,
with the help of all participants, has to keep the meeting on track. The process
that has been explained at the beginning of the meeting will help the facilitator
do this and also to handle new topics or difﬁcult points that may emerge during
the discussion.
11Those who want more information about deﬁning roles in meetings will ﬁnd it useful to look at
How to Make Meetings Work (1976) by Michael Doyle and David Straus.

9
The Art of Facilitation
159
17. Consider using small groups. This approach can bring involvement/energy or
renewed energy to a discussion. Groups need concrete directions and a time
limit.
18. Consider having one or more breaks. Breaks can be an excellent way to get
people to talk or caucus with each other, change the seating arrangements
and/or have the meeting easily go in a different direction. Participants do need
to know when the meeting will reconvene. While this can be a very effective
tool, I have seen meetings where participants did not return on time and some
used the break as an opportunity/invitation to leave.
At the End of the Meeting
19. Review the group memory. This is easily done if there is a public version (e.g.,
overhead or poster sheets on walls) rather than a private record (personal
notes). It is most important that action items are established or conﬁrmed
including who will take an action, what will be done and when it will be done.
20. Set the date, time and place of the next meeting (if one is needed) and develop
a preliminary agenda. It may be that only suggestions for dates, times and
places can be mentioned if one also has to consider the preferences of those
who were not able to attend this meeting.
21. Evaluate the meeting. This can be done casually or in a formal way. Infor-
mation obtained at the end of a meeting can be helpful to those who may put
another meeting in place.
22. Close the meeting on time – crisply and positively. Unless the whole group has
agreed to extend the meeting, it is best to close the meeting at the announced
time. After this formal ending, a group or groups may be given encouragement
to meet.
23. Clean up and rearrange the room. People in charge of a space appreciate
some help in getting a room ready for the next meeting. The amount of help that
is appreciated will vary depending on the administrators (e.g., hotel manager,
school principal) and/or the regular set-up people for the space.
After the Meeting
24. Evaluate the meeting/write and ﬁle a report. Review any comments given
orally or in writing by participants and add your own comments. Even if there
will be no additional meetings, at least a brief report (including the agenda,
any action items and evaluations) should be developed based on the meeting
as well as the preparatory and evaluation sessions. This will serve as guidance
to others who may eventually hold a meeting of these participants or run a
meeting dealing with the same or similar topics.

160
J.M. Fritz
25. Follow-up on any action items and, if there will be a next meeting, begin to
plan it. A plan needs to be put in place dealing with the completion of action
items.
26. Give praise (as deserved) for those who helped develop and run the meeting. It
is important to thank people by name for their assistance. It also may be a good
idea, in some cases, to write notes of thanks that will be included in personnel
ﬁles.
Two examples of facilitated meetings might be useful at this point. The ﬁrst,
an initiative in a Minnesota county (CR Planning, Inc. n.d.), required a permanent
stakeholder advisory commission be established for decisions involving parks,
trails and open space. A consulting group, CR Planning, used a facilitated public
participation process (during a one-year period) to “engage citizens, landowners and
public ofﬁcials in a respectful dialogue” at the start of the planning process and then
facilitated discussion of the Park Advisory Committee. A policy plan was adopted
by the County Board and this was followed by an implementation plan.12
As a second example, I facilitated a series of meetings (every two weeks for
several months) for a “blue ribbon” citizen advisory group that had been put in
place by a large city’s school board. The school board had been “encouraged” by
community groups to get input from civic and business organizations representing
minorities (as well as unions) regarding inclusive, local hiring in connection with
new construction that the school system was going to undertake over a 10-year
period. The facilitator, in this case, was involved in the process after the participants
already had been selected, helped design the process that would be used for each
meeting, facilitated each session, provided research and perspective for the head of
the advisory group and assisted in developing the Committee’s report to the board.
Mediators also serve as advisers or mentors about facilitation processes. For
example, SwissPeace (n.d.), which describes itself as a “practice-oriented peace
research institute,” has a coaching program (2012–2013) for women in Myanmar
who are engaged in peace processes. In another instance, I advised the head of a
chapter of a national NGO in developing a process for bringing together parts of a
community that was deeply divided. I also helped a community organization revise
its process for a public forum that would bring together members of the community
to discuss a multi-service center that was proposed by a religious organization
based outside of the community. The religious group thought that the center was an
excellent idea but had not collaborated with community organizations in developing
its project. Many community organizations (and many members of the community
organization sponsoring the forum) were skeptical or opposed to the project. The
12Full implementation did not happen. According to Brian Ross (2012) of CR Planning, the
implementation work was to be managed by an employee of the small parks department and not
the consultants. Most of the plan was not implemented because the parks department employee
who was to manage the implementation was hired away by another organization and county
ofﬁcials disbanded the parks department and shifted the responsibility for parks to another county
department that had a different focus.

9
The Art of Facilitation
161
community room in which the meeting was held was packed and included local
residents as well as sign-carrying members of the outside church.
Some mediators and facilitators, run meetings dealing with environmental,
community or public policy issues. Frequently such meetings are part of a series
of meetings that may take place over a long period of time (e.g., months or years).
Depending, in part, on the importance and urgency of the issue to those attending
the meeting, the need to agree on a process, the level of controversy and the number
of sectors and groups involved, the facilitator (or facilitation team) may organize
a set of planning meetings to arrange the actual decision-making meetings. Those
planning meetings could cover topics such as number of organizations that will be
represented in the meetings; how many representatives each group will have; how
decisions will be communicated to the public (if needed); who will facilitate the
actual meetings; how representatives will communicate and get the involvement of
the organizations they represent; how absences will be handled; what topics will be
covered and how decisions will be made.
Some mediators facilitate sessions in conﬂict zones or post-conﬂict situations
(see Asuni 2012, pp. 113–126; Smock and Serwer 2012, pp. 163–169). Smock and
Serwer (2012) provide advice about a number of difﬁcult issues including getting
minority representation in meetings and getting minority representatives to have
full and accepted participation from those with more power. They also caution that
if discussions involve national policies, that there need to be links to Track One
(ofﬁcial) diplomacy. And they discuss that frequently participants want to represent
themselves rather than their organizations which can have consequences in moving
things forward in a country or region. While Smock and Serwer’s advice is based
on working in conﬂict zones, the points are true (or can be adapted) for many other
kinds of mediation and facilitation settings.
Dealing with Facilitation Difﬁculties: The Well City
Experience
The hearings described below were held in Well City,13 a medium-sized community
in the U.S. The ﬁrst hearing was in a court room and run by the elected mayor. The
second hearing was in a university building and run by an experienced facilitator.
Aurora Punch, Well City’s Health Commissioner, knew that tobacco use was a
preventable cause of disease and death. She also knew the American Cancer Society
and the American Lung Association were encouraging communities to put tobacco
use prevention regulations in place and she wanted to do that in Well City.
13The example described here is based on an actual case that is discussed at length in “The Bumpy
Road to a Tobacco-Free Community: Lessons from Well City” (Fritz et al. 2000). Pseudonyms are
used here and in the original article for the names of the city and individuals.

162
J.M. Fritz
In September, Commissioner Punch sent letters to selected organizations,
including the city council, indicating that she was forming a “task force of
community leaders” to study the tobacco problem. She wanted representatives
from each group to “actively participate” in the work of the task force.
The task force ﬁrst met eight months later (in May) with 18 representatives,
including the mayor, two city council members, the clerk of court, three city board
of health members, a county health department employee, a representative from the
hospital, an employee of the county commissioner’ ofﬁce, and a member of the busi-
ness community. One of the task force members, a representative of the American
Cancer Society, was a retired regulatory technologist and familiar with the indoor
air standard accepted by the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-
conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE). The American Cancer Society representative
along with the city health commissioner and two other task force members formed
a smaller working group – the Clean-Air Regulation Subcommittee. In July, the
subcommittee recommended a clean air regulation to the city board of health that
incorporated the ASHRAE standard of ventilation.
The proposed regulation stated that “lighted smoking materials in public places
is declared a public nuisance and hazardous to the public health.” It prohibited the
possession of lighted smoking material in any form in any commercial establish-
ment (including bars, restaurants, and bowling alleys), public vehicles, restrooms,
elevators, and selected public facilities (libraries, educational facilities, museums,
auditoriums, and art galleries). The proposed regulation did allow an owner of a
facility to permit smoking if the owner installed a ventilation system based on the
ASHRAE standard or have a hearing if the owner wanted a variance.
It was anticipated that owners would not attempt to meet the ASHRAE standard,
as this would be an expensive undertaking, and also that few variances would be
given. Any owner or operation that failed to comply with the regulation could be
charged with a minor misdemeanor and ﬁned up to $100. Essentially what was
being proposed was a total smoking ban for public places.
The city health commissioner proposed the regulation at a city board of health
meeting in October and the city’s ﬁrst public hearing (meeting) was held in
November. That hearing, by all accounts, was bedlam. About 250 people jammed
a small courtroom and the group heard more than 50 speakers. The meeting lasted
more than four hours. While no smoking was allowed in the courtroom, smoking
was allowed in the hall just outside the courtroom. Tobacco smoke from the packed
corridor poured into the hall every time the court’s doors opened.
The mayor, who served as head of the city’s health board, facilitated the public
hearing. The mayor indicated that anyone who wanted to speak could do so. He
allowed speakers to go beyond the prescribed time limits and speakers frequently
repeated what others had said. Hecklers were not controlled. Most of those opposing
the proposed regulation were bar, restaurant, or small business owners.
One of the speakers was Marge Can, a well-known, realtor in the community, who
had owned her own business for more than 10 years. She was smart and energetic.
While not frequently active in the public life of the community, she had headed the

9
The Art of Facilitation
163
committee (whose members all were smokers) that organized the American Cancer
Society’s annual (fundraising) golf tournaments for the two years prior to Well
City’s tobacco-control initiative.
Each morning Marge went for coffee at P.T.’s, a local restaurant, and joined the
regulars for a discussion of local events. One morning the talk turned to the story
on the front page of the local paper, the city and county’s proposed tobacco control
regulations. After considerable discussion, Marge, who smoked two to four packs of
cigarettes a day, and a farmer decided to form an organization, BADLAW, to ﬁght
the proposed regulations. The core group of organizers also included the owner of a
restaurant and the non-smoking owner of a travel agency. They spoke at the public
hearing and Marge gave interviews to the city newspaper.
Marge said the main issue was one of freedom. She pointed out that the health
boards were not elected and had no right to be making tobacco-control rules. Marge
felt that if she and a client wanted to smoke in the conference room of her ofﬁce, they
should be able to do so without government interference.14
After the shock of the chaotic public hearing, the city health department began
licking its wounds, and four months later, in January, the city and county health
boards started working together on revising the proposed regulation. The new
proposal dropped the term “clean air” and the list of exemptions and variances
began to grow to include (1) bars, bowling alleys, and pool halls (if they have signs
stating that a no-smoking area is not available; (2) an employee vehicle where the
driver and all the passengers consent to smoking; and (3) retail tobacco stores.
More than one year after the ﬁrst hearing, in October, the city and county boards
of health held a joint public hearing at the Well City campus of a state university
to collect feedback on the revised proposal. The university building was chosen
because it was removed from city departments and ofﬁces and no smoking was
allowed in the whole building. This time there would be no smoke coming in from
the corridors.
This public hearing was held in a large auditorium, much larger than the ex-
pected number of participants, and it was run by a trained facilitator. The facilitator
gave a rather complete informational presentation that began the meeting. After
the presentation, audience members were able to speak, but they had to follow
guidelines. Speakers had to sign up in advance and no more than one speaker
was allowed from an organization. Length of speaking time and heckling were now
14Five years after Marge’s group (BADLAW) lost its last court battle against the city, Marge Can,
52, died of lung cancer. During the 20 years she had lived in Well City, Marge unsuccessfully tried
many methods to quit smoking, including acupuncture, hypnosis, and the patch. She did not try
to quit smoking while she was the spokesperson for BADLAW. One year before she died, Marge
learned she had lung cancer and would have to have surgery. She stopped smoking. During her
last year, she established a website to let others follow her progress in dealing with cancer. When
she became too weak to type her own website entries, family members made the entries for her.
The obituary that appeared in the local paper noted Marge’s community service, particularly her
volunteer work on behalf of the American Cancer Society.

164
J.M. Fritz
under control. Security personnel were available if needed, and the organizers of
the hearing had agreed in advance that if the event got out of control in some way,
it would be ended early. The meeting ended at the announced time.
The facilitator has to be in control of a meeting, in this case, a community
hearing. Well City’s ﬁrst public hearing was a disaster. It was led by an elected
ofﬁcial who did not want to upset any of his constituents; he allowed people to
speak too long and repetitively, did not control heckling, and held the hearing in
a place where tobacco smoke could pour into the hearing room. By the time of
the second hearing, Well City public health ofﬁcials had learned a lesson. The
hearing was held in a building that was smoke-free on a college campus (neutral
territory). The meeting room was much larger than the number people that would
be in attendance. This setting – a large room with many empty seats rather than
a crowded court room – means that the setting will not easily add fuel to any
controversy. There was visible security and the hand-picked, experienced facilitator
had a long, thorough, informative introduction about the main topic and established
a speaking process that was inclusive, orderly and calm. The second hearing gave
the public the opportunity to take part in the discussion, but, unlike the ﬁrst hearing,
there was no chaos.
Conclusion
Mediation and facilitation often are broadly deﬁned and the deﬁnitions can be
quite similar. This certainly is seen when mediation is described as “facilitated
negotiation.” And when Hampson and Zartman (2012, p. 35, 51) refer to “triple
talk” (when a mediator becomes involved with parties who have been negotiating)
as “mediated negotiation” or say a mediator is “by any other name [a] facilitator,
good ofﬁces, third party, etc.” While there are some differences between mediation
and facilitation, sometimes the deﬁnitions don’t reﬂect these differences because the
deﬁnitions are not detailed enough or the differences are differences in emphasis
(rather than absolute differences).
One general difference between mediation and facilitation is that facilitators need
to be able to work with large meetings (as well as small ones) and mediators,
based on their special area of work, may not have to work with large groups.
Also, mediators have to be able to write formal agreements while facilitations
often do not have such an outcome. Some think that a facilitator’s main task is
to improve the process or structure of a group while a mediator most frequently
is working on resolving an issue. (While this may generally be true, there are
many exceptions.) Finally, facilitators, because they are expected to have the
capacity to work with large groups of people, may have exposure to many
different techniques (particularly ones that encourage participation) as part of their
training while some mediators, depending on the area of practice, may not have
this training or experience. Professional mediators who work with large groups

9
The Art of Facilitation
165
usually also are facilitators; some mediators who work with individuals and small
groups are facilitators, and, increasingly, the others are being trained in the art of
facilitation.
Business-type meetings need to be prepared carefully and, if a media-
tor/facilitator or facilitator team is involved, the mediators/facilitators need to be
part of the planning as well as the implementation effort. As noted in the Well City
case, meetings that are not well-prepared may not accomplish goals, can reinforce
initial positions and anger as well as lose participants.
There is evidence that facilitated processes can be very effective. Shaw and his
colleagues (2010, p. 9), based on their research of facilitator impact during a quality
improvement process, concluded that external facilitators, who are experienced or
artisan, “are able to ask critical questions, hold people accountable, and even ‘see’
processes or dynamics that the insider may not.” The art of facilitation can help
meeting participants work through difﬁcult issues; really involve people in their
organizations and communities; help people who have had difﬁculty participating
in groups as well as those who think that others should not be full participants; and
develop creative, inclusive long-range plans. All groups do not need professional
facilitators, but experienced and artisan facilitation often can make a central
contribution to a group’s progress.
References
Amnesty International. (2011). Facilitation manual: A guide to using participatory methodologies
for human rights education. London: Amnesty International.
Asuni, J. B. (2012). Nigeria: Dialogue in the delta. In D. R. Smock & D. Serwer (Eds.), Facilitating
dialogue: USIP’s work in conﬂict zones (pp. 113–126). Washington, DC: United States Institute
of Peace Press.
Bens, I. (2000). Facilitating with ease! A step-by-step guidebook with customizable worksheets on
CD/Rom. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Bens, I. (2006). Facilitating to lead! Leadership strategies for a networked world. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
Berkvens, J. (2012). What international aid organizations can learn from international adult
learning: Experiences from Cambodia. The Journal of Agricultural Education and Extension,
18(4), 347–368.
CR Planning Inc. (n.d.). Retrieved from www.crplanning.com and www.crplanning.com/pdfs/
crowwingparks.pdf. Accessed 15 Oct 2012.
Doyle, M., & Straus, D. (1976). How to make meetings work. New York: Jove Books.
Dukes, E. F., & Firehock, K. (2001). Collaboration: A guide for environmental advocates.
Charlottesville: Institute for Environmental Negotiation.
Espiner, D., & Hartnett, F. M. (2011). ‘I felt I was in control of the meeting’: Facilitating planning
with adults with an intellectual disability. British Journal of Learning Disabilities, 40, 62–70.
Frediani, J. A. (2009). Sharing the ﬂoor: Some strategies for effective group facilitation. Unitarian
Universalist, Association of Congregations. Retrieved from www.uua.org/re/adults/151805.
Accessed 15 Jan 2013.
Fritz, J. M., Bistak, P., & Auffrey, C. (2000). The bumpy road to a tobacco-free community:
Lessons from Well City. Sociological Practice: A Journal of Clinical and Applied Sociology,
2(2), 113–126.

166
J.M. Fritz
Fryer, M. (2012). Facilitative leadership: Drawing on J¨urgen Habermas’ model of ideal speech to
propose a less impositional way to lead. Organization, 19(1), 25–43.
Hampson, F. O., & Zartman, I. W. (2012). The global power of talk: Negotiating America’s
interests. Boulder/London: Paradigm Publishers.
Hartwig, R. T. (2010). Facilitating problem solving: A case study using the devil’s advocacy
technique. Group Facilitation: A Research and Applications Journal, 10, 17–31.
Haskell, J. E., & Cyr, L. F. (2011). Community facilitator education: How training can lead to
positive impacts at the community level. Group Facilitation: A Research and Applications
Journal, 11, 5–14.
Hogan, C. (2002). Understanding facilitation: Theory and principles. London: Kogan Page.
Holborn, S. (2002). The value of measuring person-centered planning. In J. O’Brien & C. O’Brien
(Eds.), Implementing person-centered planning: Voice of experience (pp. 79–97). Toronto:
Inclusion Press.
Jenkins, J. (2004). Facilitation, training, consultation or do it yourself? Handout for ADR
institute meeting 5 November 2004. Retrieved from masterplan.co.za/resources/documents/
facilitationis.pdf. Accessed 15 Jan 2013.
Kato, F. (2010). How we think and talk about facilitation. Simulation & Gaming, 41(5), 694–704.
Kolfschoten, G. L., den Hengst-Bruggeling, M., & de Vreede, G. J. (2007). Issues in the design of
facilitated collaboration processes. Group Decision and Negotiation, 16, 347–361.
Liteman, M., Campbell, S., & Liteman, J. (2006). Retreats that work: Everything you need to know
about planning and leading great offsites (Expandedth ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Nagykaldi, Z., Mold, J. W., & Aspy, C. B. (2005). Practice facilitators: A review of the literature.
Family Medicine, 37(8), 581–588.
Nielsen, M. F. (2012). Using artifacts in brainstorming sessions to secure participation and
decouple sequentiality. Discourse Studies, 14(1), 87–109.
Rees, F. (2005). The facilitator excellence handbook (2nd ed.). San Francisco: Pfeiffer.
Reilly, C. R. (2008). Is expertise a necessary precondition for creativity? A case of four novice
learning group facilitators. Thinking Skills and Creativity, 3, 59–76.
Robert, H. M. (2011). Robert’s rules of order. Newly revised. Philadelphia: Da Capo Press.
Ross, B. (2012). Telephone interview. November 27.
Sefton, E. (2009). Resource Management Act Amendment 2009 Guidance. New Zealand. October.
Shaw, E., Looney, A., Chase, S., Navalekar, R., Stello, B., Lontok, O., & Crabtree, B. (2010). ‘In
the moment’: An analysis of facilitator impact during a quality improvement process. Group
Facilitation: A Research and Applications Journal, 10, 4–16.
Smock, D. R., & Serwer, D. (Eds.). (2012). Facilitating dialogue: USIP’s work in conﬂict zones.
Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace Press.
SwissPeace. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://www.swisspeace.ch. Accessed 16 Oct 2012.
Subramaniam, M. (2011). Grassroots groups and poor women’s empowerment in rural India.
International Sociology, 27(1), 72–95.
The State of Queensland, Department of Justice and Attorney-General (2010–2012). (n.d.). Dispute
resolution: Facilitation. Brisbane: The State of Queensland. Retrieved from http://www.justice.
qld.gov.au/justice-services/dispute-resolution/facilitation. Accessed 16 Oct 2012.
Thorpe, S. (2011). Editorial introduction. Group Facilitation: A Research and Applications
Journal, 11, 3–4.
U.S. Institute for Environmental Conﬂict Resolution. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://www.ecr.gov/
HowWeWork/Services.aspx. Accessed 16 Oct 2012.
Williams, A. (2012). Taking a step back: Learning without the facilitator on solo activities. Journal
of Adventure Education & Outdoor Learning, 12(2), 137–155.
Wilkinson, M. (n.d.). Guerilla facilitation: What to do if the meeting leader is not leading.
Retrieved from www.inifac.org/articles/arGuerillaFacilitation.pdf. Accessed 18 Oct 2012.
Wong, Z., & Aiken, M. (2003). Automated facilitation of electronic meetings. Information &
Management, 41, 125–134.
View publication stats
