215
8
There are two main types of motivation that we concern ourselves 
with as learning designers:
• Motivation to learn
• Motivation to do
We’ve already spent a lot of time looking at motivation to learn 
(remember the elephant?), so this chapter is going to concern itself 
with motivation to do.
Motivation To Do
Numerous studies have come out in the last few years that say texting 
while driving is a very very dangerous thing to do.
Shocking.
That texting while driving is dangerous probably isn’t a surprise to the 
vast majority of the population. So why do people continue to do it? 
I don’t know exactly, but I suspect it’s because people have one, or a 
mix, of the following thoughts and responses:
• “I know it’s a bad idea, and I never do it (except when I do, and  
then I feel guilty).”
• “I know it’s a bad idea, but I only do it once in a while, and I’m  
very careful.”
Design for  
Motivation
Design for 
Motivation
(In which we learn that we don’t always learn  
the right thing when we learn from experience,  
and that the elephant is a creature of habit)
Excerpted from Design For How People Learn by Julie Dirksen.  
Copyright © 2012. Used with permission of Pearson Education, Inc. and New Riders.

216
chapter 8  DESIGN FOR MOTIVATION
• “I know it’s a bad idea for other people, but I can do it because I’m really good  
at it.”
• “Huh? What’s the big deal?”
Most of the responses above indicate that this is not a knowledge problem, and 
that an intervention that focuses on knowledge isn’t going to change anything, 
because it’s not the “know” part but rather the “do” part of the sentence that’s 
the problem.
So why do people do things they know are a bad idea? It’s not because they 
aren’t smart people.
A big part of this goes back to our elephant and rider. Frequently, the rider 
knows, but the elephant still does.
We learn from experience
Part of the reason for “I know, but…” is that people learn from experience, which 
is a great thing (we wouldn’t want to live in a world where people didn’t), but 
it can cause some problems. The elephant in particular can be far more influ-
enced by experience than by abstract knowledge.
Here’s an example. Let’s say that 1 in 10 instances of texting while driving 
results in an accident (this isn’t a real statistic; I don’t think that exact data is 
known—this is just for purposes of argument). Let’s take a look at the experi-
ence of two different drivers:
Excerpted from Design For How People Learn by Julie Dirksen.  
Copyright © 2012. Used with permission of Pearson Education, Inc. and New Riders.
(Haidt, 2006)

217
MOTIVATION TO DO
Texting while driving
Driver 1
Driver 2
1st Time 
OK
OK
2nd Time
Has nasty fender bender
OK
3rd Time
Doesn’t text
OK
4th Time
Doesn’t text
OK
5th Time
Doesn’t text
OK
6th Time
Doesn’t text
OK
7th Time
Doesn’t text
OK
8th Time
Doesn’t text
OK
9th Time
Doesn’t text
OK
10th Time
Doesn’t text
Has an accident
Both drivers are learning from experience, but the lesson Driver 2 is learning 
from experience is that texting while driving is fine—see, look at all the experi-
ence that confirms that! Until it isn’t fine, of course.
This is why people have a really hard time with activities where the action is 
now but the consequence is later. The elephant is a creature of immediacy. Take 
a look at these classic “I know, but...” activities. 
Classic “I know, but…” activities
Activity
Immediate Consequence
Delayed Consequence
Smoking
Nice nicotine hit
Lung cancer
Saving for retirement
Less money
More money
Exercise
Ouch
Nice abs!
Doughnuts
Mmm…
I’m not getting on that scale…
In these activities, the elephant is being asked to sacrifice in the present for 
some future gain, but the elephant is only really persuaded by what’s happening 
now, and by the experience of the immediate consequences. The rider knows 
that there’s an association with the future consequence, but whatever that 
future consequence is, it’s too abstract to influence the elephant.
Excerpted from Design For How People Learn by Julie Dirksen.  
Copyright © 2012. Used with permission of Pearson Education, Inc. and New Riders.

218
chapter 8  DESIGN FOR MOTIVATION
Remember, change is hard
Now, you might not be trying to fix behaviors as difficult as smoking, but any-
thing that involves extra effort is going to be a lot easier if the elephant is on 
board with the program.
In particular, changing an existing pattern of behavior can require effort for the 
elephant. The elephant is a creature of habit, which means that if the elephant 
is used to going left, it’s going to require a fair bit of conscious effort to get it to 
go right instead.
Before we look at ways to influence learner behavior, and while this word “change” 
keeps popping up, let’s be clear on one thing: none of this is about controlling  
the learner. It’s not about tricking your learners into compliance. Instead, it’s  
about designing environments that make it easier for those learners to succeed.
The experience they have when they are learning about something can make a 
difference in the decisions they make later.
Designing for behavior
Let’s take a look at some methods to design for behavior change or 
reinforcement.
Excerpted from Design For How People Learn by Julie Dirksen.  
Copyright © 2012. Used with permission of Pearson Education, Inc. and New Riders.

219
DESIGNING FOR BEHAVIOR
The Technology Acceptance Model (TAM)
The technology acceptance model (Davis 1989) is an information systems 
model that looks at what variables affect whether or not someone adopts a new 
technology. It’s been fairly well researched, and although it isn’t without its crit-
ics, I find it to be a useful frame. At the heart of the model are two variables:
Perceived Usefulness
Perceived Ease of Use
Does the learner see this change as 
something that will be useful to them?
Does the learner see this change as something 
that will be easy to use or implement?
It’s not a complicated idea—if you want someone to use something, they need 
to believe that it’s actually useful, and that it won’t be a major pain in the ass  
to use.
TAM specifically addresses technology adoption, but those variables make 
sense in a lot of other areas as well. You want someone to use a new method 
of coaching employees? Or maybe a new safety procedure? If your audience 
believes that it’s pointless (i.e., not useful) or it’s going to be a major pain (i.e., 
not easy to use), they will probably figure out ways around it. Then it either fails 
to get adopted or you get into all sorts of issues around punishments or incen-
tives to try to force the change to happen.
I keep TAM in mind when I design anything that requires adopting a new tech-
nology or system or practice (which is almost everything I do). Some of the 
questions I ask are:
•	 Is the new behavior genuinely useful? Sometimes it’s not useful for the 
learner, but it is useful for the organization, or it’s a compliance necessity. 
In those cases, it can be a good idea to acknowledge it and make sure the 
learner understands why the change is being made—that it isn’t just the 
organization messing with their workflow, but that it’s a necessary change for 
other reasons.
•	 If it is useful, how will the learner know that? You can cite case studies, 
examples, people talking about how it’s helped them, or give the learner the 
experience of it being useful through simulations. Show Don’t Tell becomes 
particularly important here. You can assert usefulness until you’re blue in 
the face, and you won’t get nearly as much buy-in as you will if learners are 
able to try it, or to hear positive endorsements from trusted peers. Can you 
involve learners in planning the change so they can have input and can help 
make sure that the change will be effective?
Excerpted from Design For How People Learn by Julie Dirksen.  
Copyright © 2012. Used with permission of Pearson Education, Inc. and New Riders.

220
chapter 8  DESIGN FOR MOTIVATION
•	 Is the new behavior easy to use? If not, why not? Is it too complex? Is it 
because people are too used to their current system? People will learn to  
use even the most hideous system by mentally automating tasks, but then 
when you ask them to change, it’s really difficult because they can no longer 
use those mental shortcuts, and the new system feels uncomfortably 
effortful until they’ve had enough practice.
•	 If it’s not easy to use, is there anything that can be done to help that?  
Can the learners practice enough to make it easier? Can you make job aids  
or other performance supports? Can you roll it out in parts so they don’t  
have to tackle it all at once? Can you improve the process or interface to 
address ease-of-use issues? 
Diffusions of Innovation
The other model I find really useful is from Everett Rogers’ classic book Diffusion 
of Innovations. If you haven’t read it, you might want to get a copy. It’s a really 
entertaining read, packed with intriguing case studies and loaded with useful 
stuff. The part I want to focus on here is his take on what perceived attributes 
affect whether a user adopts or rejects an innovation:
Relative Advantage—The degree to which an innovation is perceived as being 
better than the idea it supersedes
Compatibility—The degree to which an innovation is perceived to be consistent 
with the existing values, past experiences, and needs of potential adopters
Complexity—The degree to which an innovation is perceived as difficult to use
Observability—The degree to which the results of an innovation are visible  
to others
Trialability—The opportunity to experiment with the innovation on a limited basis 
(Rogers 1983)
There is obviously some crossover with TAM, but if I’m designing a learning 
experience for a new system, I use this as a mental checklist:
•	 Are the learners going to believe the new system is better?
•	 Are there compatibility issues that need to be addressed?
•	 Can we do anything to reduce complexity?
•	 Do the learners have a chance to see it being used?
•	 Do the learners have a chance to try it out themselves?
•	 How can learners have the opportunity to have some success with the  
new system?
Excerpted from Design For How People Learn by Julie Dirksen.  
Copyright © 2012. Used with permission of Pearson Education, Inc. and New Riders.

221
DESIGNING FOR BEHAVIOR
If somebody really, really doesn’t want to do something, designing instruction 
around these elements probably isn’t going to change their mind. And if a new 
system, process, or idea is really sucky, or a pain in the ass to implement, then it’s  
going to fail no matter how many opportunities you give the learner to try it out.
How might this play out in a real-life, on-the-job situation? Let’s say you are 
responsible for creating training for a network of nursing homes. There have 
been a number of incidents lately with residents falling down and injuring them-
selves. The network has started a new initiative to try to reduce the number 
of falls. Your job is to train the staff to use a new process for evaluating a resi-
dent’s risk level for falling. The staff is supposed to use a five-point checklist 
(steadiness, use of walking aids, physical dexterity, vision impairment, and 
environmental hazards) to evaluate a resident’s risk, and to take action on high-
risk ratings. The difficulty is that this is a different procedure than has been 
used in the past, and it is extra work for the already busy staff.
What could you build into a learning experience for each of the check-points to 
make it more likely that the staff will use the new procedure?
Think about each of Everett’s attributes (relative advantage, compatibility, com-
plexity, observability and trialability), and how you accomplish each of these for 
the new procedure. Consider how you would apply these ideas before reading 
the design suggestions below.
Design suggestions:
•	 Relative Advantage  Is there a way for the user to see how many more falls 
can be prevented using the new system? This can be done with statistics, 
but statistics talk to the rider, not the elephant. Some way to make this 
information more visceral for people will have more impact.
	
For example, learners might be able to identify with the story of Millie, a lively 
resident who is negatively affected by a fall, and has to struggle to come back.  
The new method can be used to prevent Millie from falling again.
	
Statistics can also be translated into tangibles. For example, a 17% reduction 
in falls can mean X more residents who can visit their families for the holidays 
and Y more residents who can operate independently, which ultimately 
equals less work for the staff also.
	
Another way to show relative advantage would be for the learners to work 
through a few cases using the old system, and then assessing those same 
cases using the new system. They can then report back on how many more 
Excerpted from Design For How People Learn by Julie Dirksen.  
Copyright © 2012. Used with permission of Pearson Education, Inc. and New Riders.

222
chapter 8  DESIGN FOR MOTIVATION
potential hazards were identified using the new system. By having the learners 
discover and report back on the advantages, it becomes more Show than Tell.
•	 Compatibility  One way to improve compatibility is to recruit the learners on 
this task. As part of the training, have them look at how this new procedure 
is incompatible, and then have them help brainstorm ways to make it more 
compatible with the existing process.
•	 Complexity  The first step in clarifying and taming complexity is to 
reduce the learners’ perceived sense of complexity by giving them enough 
opportunities to practice such that the process starts to feel easier to them.
	
The second step is to actually reduce the complexity. If the new process 
adds a separate form, can it be incorporated with the existing forms? If it’s 
a situation where the learners have to write notes, can some of the items be 
converted to a checklist so they don’t have to remember as much, and so 
they can fill out the documentation faster?
•	 Observability  Are there pilot programs that the learner can observe? Can 
you identify opinion leaders (the folks everybody listens to) and have them 
use the new process first, so everyone else can see how it’s going?
•	 Trialability  Stage some practice scenarios that the learners can work through 
to see how the new system works. After they’ve had a chance to try it out, 
regroup and smooth out any rough edges, questions, or issues with the learners.
Self-efficacy
Self-efficacy can be described as someone’s belief in their own ability to suc-
ceed. Basically, it’s the little engine that could (“I think I can…I think I can...”).
Which of these guys do you think is going to be more likely to try a new method 
or procedure?
Earlier in the book, I mentioned a curriculum for drug and alcohol prevention for  
middle-school students (www.projectalert.com). One of the key elements of 
that curriculum is developing the students’ sense of resistance self-efficacy.
Excerpted from Design For How People Learn by Julie Dirksen.  
Copyright © 2012. Used with permission of Pearson Education, Inc. and New Riders.

223
DESIGNING FOR BEHAVIOR
Dealing with peer pressure involving drugs, cigarettes, and alcohol is another 
classic “I know, but…” scenario, right? For example, kids don’t start smoking 
because they don’t know smoking is bad. They’ve all gotten that message, so 
there are other reasons. But the situations where students need to make the 
right decision are emotionally fraught, high-stress situations. Being able to act 
confidently can make a big difference in those situations.
Students participating in the prevention curriculum practice, and practice more, 
and practice more how they are going to handle the situation. They have state-
ments ready, and they’ve tried them out in role-play scenarios. Additionally, 
they have the confidence of their peer group in the class, who have also talked 
about their strategies in the same circumstances. 
In addition to feeling capable, it helps if learners also feel that the necessary 
task or skill is within their control.
Carol Dweck, a social and developmental psychologist and researcher, con-
ducted an experiment with fifth graders (Mueller & Dweck 1998). She had the 
students solve a set of problems. When they were done, half the group was told 
“You must be smart at these problems” and the others were praised for their 
effort—“You must have worked hard at these problems.” They then had students 
attempt subsequent tasks.
Dweck describes the results: 
We found that praise for intelligence tended to put students in a fixed mind-set 
(intelligence is fixed, and you have it), whereas praise for effort tended to put them 
in a growth mind-set (you’re developing these skills because you’re working 
hard). We then offered students a chance to work on either a challenging task 
that they could learn from or an easy one that ensured error-free performance. 
Most of those praised for intelligence wanted the easy task, whereas most of 
those praised for effort wanted the challenging task and the opportunity to learn. 
When the students tackled subsequent tasks, the students who had been 
praised for intelligence (something not in their control) did worse than they had 
done initially, and the students who had been praised for working hard (some-
thing they did control) did better overall.
Well, that seems to have worked pretty effectively with kids, but are there ways 
to improve the self-efficacy of adult learners as well?
Excerpted from Design For How People Learn by Julie Dirksen.  
Copyright © 2012. Used with permission of Pearson Education, Inc. and New Riders.

224
chapter 8  DESIGN FOR MOTIVATION
Let’s revisit Marianna, from Chapter 1. You’ll recall that she is a newly minted 
supervisor for her company’s IT support department. She was a great IT support 
person and now she’s been promoted, supervising five other IT support workers. 
Her HR department has sent her to a new-manager training class, where she 
learned all about the paperwork necessary for managing hourly workers, and about 
a coaching model for providing good and timely feedback to her direct reports.
Marianna’s first few weeks have been a bit rocky. She is swamped by the paper-
work demands, and has to work really hard to keep up. Other supervisors seem 
to stay on top of their paperwork, so Marianna isn’t really sure what she’s doing 
wrong. A couple of her employees are starting to come in late, and she’s reluc-
tant to confront them directly about it, because she doesn’t want it to seem like 
she got all bossy just because she was promoted. She tries to use the coaching 
method she was taught, but while it works a little with one of the problem employ-
ees, it doesn’t work at all with the other, and as Marianna gets busy, she doesn’t 
really finish all the steps to the coaching process. She’s not that convinced it was 
helpful, anyway.
Marianna’s manager is aware that she’s struggling somewhat, and is thinking of 
arranging more managerial training for her.
What are some ways you could design learning experiences that would 
increase Marianna’s sense of self-efficacy? Think about your own answer 
before reading the design suggestion that follows.
Design suggestion ➜ Practice is a really good place to start, probably first 
through role-playing with her supervisor, or with others who can give her good 
feedback. She can also shadow some other supervisors who are successfully 
using the coaching model, and see it in use. She can try using the coaching model  
for smaller issues, rather than using it to tackle major performance problems 
right out of the gate. If she can use it to solve some smaller issues, she can gain 
more confidence in using it with bigger, more intimidating issues. Additionally, 
she can practice establishing herself as the supervisor of the team by doing some 
other activities that are non-punitive—possibly ones around developing the 
team in positive ways. This will make her more confident in her role as supervi-
sor, which will help when it comes time to deal with more challenging issues.
Modeling And Practice 
In Marianna’s example, we looked at the value of observing someone else, and 
of practicing to develop self-efficacy. 
Excerpted from Design For How People Learn by Julie Dirksen.  
Copyright © 2012. Used with permission of Pearson Education, Inc. and New Riders.

225
DESIGNING FOR BEHAVIOR
These practices have other benefits besides developing self-efficacy. We know 
that the elephant is a creature of habit, and that it likes to learn from its direct 
experience (remember the second driver in the texting example?).
It takes effort to switch paths. By creating opportunities for the learner to see 
behaviors modeled and to practice them, you greatly increase the likelihood that 
those behaviors will continue later. A particularly useful resource on creating 
new, positive habits is the work of BJ Fogg (www.behaviormodel.org).
Another way to practice and to help increase the likelihood of a behavior being 
used is to walk learners a few steps down the path as part of the learning 
design. By this I mean, have your learners prepare themselves to employ the 
knowledge or skill by actively figuring out how they will use it to address their 
own specific challenges or tasks—stick with them as they think through moving 
from the theoretical to the practical. 
We’ve talked a lot about using scenarios to make learning more vivid and engag-
ing, but the best scenarios are the learner’s actual problems or challenges.
Here are some examples:
Topic of the Learning Experience
Design
How to write better  
performance reviews
If they can, have learners bring to class a performance 
review that they need to write, and structure the 
activities and discussions around writing that review. 
At the end of the class, each learner will have a draft 
of a real performance review.
Filling out tax returns
Have students start their own returns.
Speaking Thai
Have learners think about things they’d like to be 
able to talk about (their kids, music, food, politics, 
introducing themselves), and have them work on 
ways to talk about those topics in Thai.
Project management
Have learners bring their own project documents 
and project concerns, and be ready to discuss those 
concerns, and have them work on solutions to those 
problems as part of the class.
Excerpted from Design For How People Learn by Julie Dirksen.  
Copyright © 2012. Used with permission of Pearson Education, Inc. and New Riders.

226
chapter 8  DESIGN FOR MOTIVATION
This set of tactics does a few useful things. First, it gets the learners imagining 
how they can use the material in their own world. They start picturing the 
possibilities and figuring out how to deal with obstacles.
Second, it lets the learner get some practice with their own material when there 
is still support to help iron out snags. 
Third, the learners have now made an investment. Behavioral economists talk 
about sunk cost and loss aversion. People have a strong reluctance to discard 
something that they’ve already invested in.
Fourth, they are ready to go when they get back to the real world. There’s always 
a barrier to starting something new, and if the learner has already scaled part of 
that barrier, then there’s less effort required from them as they continue.
So, whenever it’s feasible, have the learners apply the subject matter to their 
own situations.
Social Proof
We’ve already talked about how a good way to attract the elephant’s attention 
is to tell it that all the other elephants are doing it. 
But social proof (as discussed in Chapter 5—you remember, the tendency  
of people to base their own actions on the actions of others around them) is 
useful not only for attracting attention. It’s also really good for encouraging  
the behavior.
Excerpted from Design For How People Learn by Julie Dirksen.  
Copyright © 2012. Used with permission of Pearson Education, Inc. and New Riders.

227
DESIGNING FOR BEHAVIOR
Additionally, we can’t be experts on everything, so a good tool—often an effec-
tive shortcut—is to turn to or to cite people whose opinions we respect, and 
whose advice we seek. If those people tell us that something is useful, we are 
much more likely to try it ourselves. I have folks who, if they tell me to go check 
something out, I’ll do it without much question, because I trust their opinion:
I’ve worked on a number of client projects where, at the beginning of the 
course, there has been a “this is a really important initiative” message from the 
CEO, or the relevant vice president, which is fine. It’s good to know a project is 
known and supported at the top—gives it a feeling of authority, I guess you’d say.
But really, who is, or should be, the actual authority figure when it comes to 
doing your actual job? Is it the CEO, or is the person in the next cubicle who has 
five times as much experience as you? If you are shopping on Amazon, whose 
opinion are you going to really value—the publisher, whose blurb assures you 
this author is a GENIUS, or the 19 readers who’ve said “meh…”?
In the Project ALERT drug-prevention project, they use influential opinion  
leaders to talk to kids about reasons not to do drugs. Now, granted, the term 
“influential opinion leaders” means different things in different situations, but  
if you are a 13-year old schoolkid, whose opinion would you most value?
Excerpted from Design For How People Learn by Julie Dirksen.  
Copyright © 2012. Used with permission of Pearson Education, Inc. and New Riders.

228
chapter 8  DESIGN FOR MOTIVATION
Obviously, that depends on the 13-year old, but as a general rule, for middle-
schoolers, high-school kids are pretty much the arbiters of what is and is not 
cool. To that end, Project ALERT doesn’t spend a lot of time with lectures from 
adult authority figures, but makes good use of teenagers talking about their 
experiences, and how to make good choices. 
So think about it—given your subject matter, who are the really influential people 
in your organization or in the eyes of your target audience? How can you make 
those opinions visible? Here are a few possibilities:
•	 Have people describe successes with the process, procedure, or skill. These 
descriptions can be presented on an intranet, a discussion forum, in email 
blasts, or through any delivery methods already available in an organization. 
If possible, you could create mini feature stories about the person who is 
using the process to good effect—that person could be the star of the show.
•	 Engage opinion leaders first. Involve your opinion leaders in the planning of 
the endeavor and in the creation and design of the learning experience. Can 
you have them lend case studies, or agree to champion the undertaking? Can 
you have them mentor others?
•	 Make progress visible. Many games put up leader boards to show 
who is really killing it. While shaming low-performing people publicly is 
counterproductive, having a way to acknowledge those who are succeeding 
can help encourage others. 
Excerpted from Design For How People Learn by Julie Dirksen.  
Copyright © 2012. Used with permission of Pearson Education, Inc. and New Riders.

229
DESIGNING FOR BEHAVIOR
Visceral Matters
The elephant is not influenced only by outside forces like peer encouragement. 
The elephant is also swayed by direct experience and strong emotion. Direct 
visual choices and visceral experiences can sway the choices that learners make. 
For example, in the cake-or-fruit-salad choice from Chapter 5, people were 
more likely to pick the cake if they actually had it in front of them. If the choice 
was more abstract, they had more self-control about choosing fruit salad.
If we thought back to our texting-while-driving issue, how could we make the 
experience more visceral or direct for people?
Here are a couple of ways this has been done:
•	 The New York Times created an interactive game to test how good you are at 
changing lanes while distracted by a text message. It measures how much 
your reaction time slows down when you are trying to deal with distractions. 
You get direct experience with your own limitations. Unfortunately, it’s not 
a very realistic simulation (you change lanes by pressing numbers on the 
keyboard).
•	 In 2009, the Gwent Police Force in Wales sponsored the creation of a video 
showing teenage girls in a car. The driver is texting, and while she does, the  
car drifts across the median line and strikes an oncoming car. A horrific 
accident ensues, and you see every graphic detail.
These are both visceral procedures—one involving direct experience and one 
an emotionally wrenching video. There’s no data I can find on the outcomes of 
either solution, unfortunately. However, I can tell you from personal experience: 
I do flash on the memory of the video if I’m ever tempted to break my own rule 
against texting while driving. 
While scare tactics often fail to change behavior, there does seem to be some 
benefit to strong visceral experiences, although more research is needed in  
this area.
or
Excerpted from Design For How People Learn by Julie Dirksen.  
Copyright © 2012. Used with permission of Pearson Education, Inc. and New Riders.

230
chapter 8  DESIGN FOR MOTIVATION
You need to follow up
All of the above suggestions and strategies can be useful, but possibly the most 
important idea to keep in mind is this:
Change is a process, not an event.
Any time you want learners to change their behavior, it’s a process, and it needs 
to be reinforced.
The ways to reinforce the change are all the things we’ve already discussed, 
so this isn’t a new idea at this point, but it’s still an important point. Be patient! 
Even if all your learners start out with the best intentions, making a conscious 
effort to implement the new solution or innovation, they are likely to trickle off if 
the change isn’t reinforced. Always consider how that change will be reinforced 
over the long term. 
Summary
•	 There are two kinds of motivation that learning designers need to consider: 
motivation to learn, and motivation to do.
•	 When you hear “I know, but…,” that’s a clue that you’ll probably need to 
design for motivation.
•	 “I know, but…” frequently comes up when there is a delayed reward or 
consequence.
•	 We learn from experience, but it can be a problem if we learn the wrong thing 
from experience.
•	 Change is hard.
•	 We are creatures of habit—irritating for the short-term learning curve, but 
potentially useful if we can help learners develop a new habit.
•	 You may be able to influence your learners, but you can’t control them.
•	 Learning designs should show the learners how something new is useful and 
easy to use.
•	 Try to ensure your learners get the opportunity to observe and personally try 
new processes or procedures.
•	 Learners need to feel a sense of self-efficacy with the new challenge or skill.
•	 Use opinion leaders as examples.
•	 Visceral experiences may have more impact that abstract ones, although the 
research on this topic is ongoing.
Excerpted from Design For How People Learn by Julie Dirksen.  
Copyright © 2012. Used with permission of Pearson Education, Inc. and New Riders.

231
SUMMARY
References
Bandura, Albert. 1977. Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral 
change. Psychological Review 84: 191-215.
Dance, Gabriel, Tom Jackson, and Aron Pilhofer. 2009. Gauging Your 
Distraction. New York Times. www.nytimes.com/interactive/2009/07/19/
technology/20090719-driving-game.html
Davis, F. D. 1989. Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user 
acceptance of information technology. MIS Quarterly 13(3): 319–340.
Dweck, Carol S. 2007. The Perils and Promises of Praise. Educational Leadership 
65 (2): 34–39.
Fogg, BJ. 2011, 2010. Behavior Model (www.behaviormodel.org) and Behavior 
Grid (www.behaviorgrid.org). 
Mueller, Claudia M. and Carol S. Dweck. 1998. Intelligence praise can undermine 
motivation and performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 75: 
33–52.
PSA Texting and Driving, U.K. 2009. www.youtube.com/watch?v=8I54mlK0kVw. 
Described at www.gwent.police.uk/leadnews.php?a=2172.
Rogers, Everett M. 1962. Diffusion of Innovations. Glencoe: Free Press. Most 
recently revised 2003 (5th edition).
Excerpted from Design For How People Learn by Julie Dirksen.  
Copyright © 2012. Used with permission of Pearson Education, Inc. and New Riders.
Also: 
Haidt, Jonathan. 2006. The Happiness Hypothesis. New York: 
Basic Books
