COACHING PSYCHOLOGY MANUAL Margaret Moore Bob Tschannen-Moran With the Wellcoaches faculty team COACHING PSYCHOLOGY MANUAL Acquisitions Editor: Emily Lupash Managing Editor: Andrea M. Klingler Marketing Manager: Christen Murphy Senior Production Editor: Sandra Cherrey Scheinin Designer: Teresa Mallon Compositor: Circle Graphics Copyright © 2010 Wellcoaches Corporation. 351 West Camden Street 530 Walnut Street Baltimore, MD 21201 Philadelphia, PA 19106 Printed in China All rights reserved. This book is protected by copyright. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, including as photocopies or scanned-in or other electronic copies, or utilized by any information storage and retrieval system without written permission from the copyright owner, except for brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. Materials appearing in this book prepared by individuals as part of their official duties as U.S. government employees are not covered by the above-mentioned copyright. To request permission, please contact Lippincott Williams & Wilkins at 530 Walnut Street, Philadelphia, PA 19106, via email at permissions@lww.com, or via website at lww.com (products and services). 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Moore, Margaret, MBA. Coaching psychology manual / Margaret Moore, Bob Tschannen-Moran ; with the Wellcoaches faculty team. p. ; cm. Includes bibliographical references and index. ISBN 978-0-7817-7262-4 1. Health coaches. I. Tschannen-Moran, Bob. II. Title. [DNLM: 1. Counseling—methods. 2. Health Behavior. 3. Motivation. WM 55 M823c 2010] R727.415M66 2010 610.73'7—dc22 2008047615 Care has been taken to confirm the accuracy of the information present and to describe generally accepted practices. However, the authors, editors, and publisher are not respon- sible for errors or omissions or for any consequences from application of the information in this book and make no warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the currency, completeness, or accuracy of the contents of the publication. Application of this information in a particular situation remains the professional responsibility of the practitioner; the clinical treatments described and recommended may not be considered absolute and  universal recommendations. The authors, editors, and publisher have exerted every effort to ensure that drug selection and dosage set forth in this text are in accordance with the current recommendations and practice at the time of publication. However, in view of ongoing research, changes in government regulations, and the constant flow of information relating to drug therapy and drug reactions, the reader is urged to check the package insert for each drug for any change in indications and dosage and for added warnings and precautions. This is partic- ularly important when the recommended agent is a new or infrequently employed drug. Some drugs and medical devices presented in this publication have Food and Drug Administration (FDA) clearance for limited use in restricted research settings. It is the responsibility of the health care provider to ascertain the FDA status of each drug or device planned for use in their clinical practice. To purchase additional copies of this book, call our customer service department at  (800) 638-3030 or fax orders to (301) 223-2320. International customers should call  (301) 223-2300. Visit Lippincott Williams & Wilkins on the Internet: http://www.lww.com. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins customer service representatives are available from  am to   pm, EST. This manual is dedicated to my wonderful husband,Paul Clark,a biotechnology patent attorney,who dreamed up the idea for me to start Wellcoaches while I was a biotechnology executive.Paul is the reason that my life is now a work of art. Margaret Moore vii Margaret is an entrepreneur and17-year veteran of the bio- technologyindustryinthe UK, Canada, the US, and France. She served in marketing and business development roles at three companies, which later joined AstraZeneca or SanofiAventis. She served as CEO and COO of two early- stage biotech companies. In 2000, Margaret shifted focus from the high technology side of medicine to prevention and well- being and founded Wellcoaches Corporation (a strate- gic partner of the American College of Sports Medicine) to set the standard for professional coaches in healthcare and build the new professions of health coach, fitness coach, and wellness coach. The company’s coach training school, which employs 30 world-class faculty members, has trained more than 3,000 physical and mental health profes- sionals as health, fitness, and wellness coaches over the past five years. The school now trains more than 1,000 coaches per year. Margaret’s collaboration with Edward Phillips, MD, to build a coaching roadmap for physician visits has led to the launch of the Institute of Lifestyle Medicine at Harvard Medical School, of which Margaret is a founding advisor. Margaret is the lead or co-author of • Harvard Medical School online CME pro- gram: Prescribing Lifestyle Medicine for Weight Management • White paper: The obesity epidemic—a confi- dence crisis calling for professional coaches • Principles of Behavioral Psychology in Well- ness Coaching • Relational Flow: Theoretical Model for the Intuitive Dance (new theory of coaching psy- chology) • Coach Meg’s Blog at www.coachmeg.com • Trade book underway titled: Coach Meg and the Realization of Rachel (a pediatrician) Margaret is a seasoned speaker, including radio and television, and has delivered more than 50 work- shops and presentations about coaching psychology and positive psychology at national and international conferences. Born in Toronto, she earned a BS in Biology and an MBA from the University of Western Ontario in 1978 and 1983, respectively. Margaret is a board member of the Boston Philharmonic Orchestra, led by Benjamin Zander. Bob Tschannen-Moran, IAC- CC, is the founder and Pres- ident of LifeTrek Coaching International,  a  cutting- edge group of professional coaches and consultants with diverse backgrounds, education, training, and ex- perience. Founded in 1998, LifeTrek  uses  strengths- based strategies to assist individuals and organizations to unleash their full potential. LifeTrek “celebrates the best to bring out the best in life and work.” Bob is a graduate of three coach-training pro- grams (Coach U, Wellcoaches, and FastTrack) and is an avid participant in life-long learning opportunities. He has particularly enjoyed learning from CoachVille, Appreciative Inquiry Unlimited, the NTL Institute  for Applied Behavioral Sciences, the Center for Nonviolent Communication, and the International Coach Federation. He is certified by the International Association of Coaching. Bob is an avid writer and collaborator in the field of coaching. His weekly electronic newsletter, LifeTrek Provisions, goes out to more than 50,000 people in  152 countries. Recent topics have included Evolu- tionary Wellness, Stress-Proof Your Life, the Art of Coaching, Ten Keys to Better Listening, Navigat- ing Life’s Transitions, and Common Values for the Common Good. Past issues are archived at www. LifeTrekCoaching.com. Bob has also written a book chapter on Skills and Performance Coaching for the Sage Handbook of Coaching. Bob enjoys speaking and workshop leadership, particularly when it comes to coaching, strengths-based planning, communication training, and promoting wellness. ABOUT THE AUTHORS viii ABOUT THE AUTHORS educational leadership at the College of William and Mary and a collaborator in LifeTrek Coaching Inter- national; his daughter, Bryn Moran, a medical doctor in Los Angeles; as well as his son and daughter-in- law, Evan and Michelle Tschannen, who graduated from the University of Virginia in May 2008 with mas- ter’s degrees in Systems Engineering and Special Education, respectively. Before becoming a coach and head of a coaching organization, Bob served for 20 years as a United Church of Christ pastor in Connecticut, Chicago, and Columbus, Ohio. He graduated from Northwestern University with a BA in 1975 and from Yale University with an MDiv in 1979. Bob is active in Kiwanis and marathon running. His family includes his wife, Megan, a professor of CHAPTER 5 Self-Efficacy and Self-Esteem ix ix Margaret Moore, MBA Founder and CEO, Wellcoaches Corporation Wellesley, Massachusetts Bob Tschannen-Moran, MDiv, IAC-CC Wellcoaches Faculty Williamsburg, Virginia Gloria Silverio, MA, PCC Faculty, Wellcoaches Corporation Delray, Florida Gabe Highstein, PhD, RN Faculty, Wellcoaches Corporation East Falmouth, Massachusetts Lori Gray Boothroyd, PhD, LP, PCC Faculty, Wellcoaches Corporation Traverse City, Michigan Kate Larsen, BS, PCC Faculty, Wellcoaches Corporation Eden Prairie, Minnesota Juli Compton, PhD Faculty, Wellcoaches Corporation Eagle, Indiana Erika Jackson, MA Faculty, Wellcoaches Corporation Canal Winchester, Ohio Chuck Schroeder, MS Executive Wellness Coach Estes Park, Colorado Pam Schmid, BS, ACSM HFI Certified Executive Wellness Coach Faculty, Wellcoaches Corporation Clayton, North Carolina Walter R. Thompson, PhD, FACSM, FAACVPR Department of Kinesiology and Health Georgia State University Atlanta, Georgia Jessica Wolfson, BS, PCC Faculty, Wellcoaches Corporation Oakland, California Robert Rhode, PhD Assistant Professor, Clinical Family and  Community Medicine Department of Psychiatry University of Arizona Tucson, Arizona Carol Kauffman, PhD, ABPP, PCC Assistant Clinical Professor, Harvard Medical School Director, Coaching and Positive Psychology Initiative Arlington, Massachusetts Beverly J. Richstone, PhD Monument, Colorado CONTRIBUTORS xi Batrice Adams Certified Personal Trainer/Performance  Nutrition Specialist Pine Hill, New Jersey Deanna Brolly Personal Fitness Trainer/Yoga Instructor Western Athletic Clubs San Francisco, California Tiffany Bryson Health & Physical Education North Georgia College and State University Dahlonega, Georgia Timothy Burns Vice President Best Health Solutions St. Petersburg, Florida Sarah Carr Personal Trainer/Fitness Instructor Cambridge Family YMCA Cambridge, Massachusetts Stacie Parn Assistant Manager, Fitness Center Northeast Utilities Berlin, Connecticut Karen Pitstick Fitness Specialist Health & Fitness Parrish Medical Center Titusville, Florida Shaunna Rodgers Trainer Addyston, Ohio Gail Sas Fitness Trainer Buellton, California Judy Springer Lecturer Health, Physical Education and Athletics University of Wisconsin Parkside Kenosha, Wisconsin Kimberly Weary Assistant Professor Exercise & Rehabilitative Sciences Slippery Rock University Slippery Rock, Pennsylvania REVIEWERS xiii Wellcoaches Corporation, the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM), and our growing commu- nity of coaches are building the foundation for the new professions of wellness coach, health coach, and fitness coach. Since Wellcoaches was founded in 2000, we have worked hard to establish the gold standard in coaching competencies in the healthcare, fitness, and wellness industries. Our integrity, commitment to the highest standards, and our passion, vision, and dedication are what bonds the Wellcoaches commu- nity together. Having trained more than 3,000 coaches and now more than 1,000 coaches per year (all who have learned from previous versions of this manual), we’ve built the largest community of coaches in healthcare worldwide and the foundation to support a global industry that we hope grows to 100,000 coaches or more. We could not have published this manual any sooner. It has taken almost 10 years to distill the princi- ples and practices of coaching psychology; even so, this manual represents only the beginning. The field of coaching psychology is evolving rapidly, with our help. The way our coaching psychology curriculum has grown indeed mimics the way coaching works with clients. A clear vision has led to clear goals and impressive outcomes that continually stretch us in new and surprising ways. With the publication of this man- ual, our curriculum has matured into a robust training program on coaching psychology. We are teaching evidence-based coaching psychol- ogy to pioneering credentialed professionals in health, fitness, and mental health, enabling them to energize and empower clients to master health and well-being. Together, we hope to make a dent in some of the tough- est challenges of our times: the epidemics of obesity, sedentary lifestyles, stress, poor nutrition, and ever- rising healthcare costs. ORGANIZATION This manual comprises three parts and 12 chapters. The first part, comprising five chapters about core coaching skills, starts with a chapter on the fundamen- tals of coaching psychology. We explore definitions of coaching, describe coaching specialties, introduce scope of practice, ethical, and liability guidelines, and make the case for professional coaches trained in best practices. Chapter 2 discusses the key skills that generate the coaching relationship. In Chapter 3 we explore the richness of the Transtheoretical Model and processes of behavior change before moving to Chapter 4 for an engaging overview of the appre- ciative inquiry model, which we’ve adapted as a strengths-based approach to coaching. Chapter 5 draws from the fields of nonviolent communication (NVC) and motivational interviewing (MI) to teach core skills around empathy, handling ambivalence, and eliciting intrinsic motivation and self-efficacy. The last chapter in Part I discusses in more depth the con- cepts of self-efficacy and self-esteem, both improved by coaching as universal coaching outcomes, whether stated or not, applying Bandura’s seminal work as well as concepts from the new field of research-driven, positive psychology. Part II of the manual is called the Coaching Tool- box. The first chapter discusses approaches to client assessment, followed by Chapter 8, which describes detailed approaches and guidelines for helping clients build visions, set goals, make plans, and track progress. We then describe the heart of a coaching session, the generative moment, to which we devote an entire chap- ter because generative moments represent the most powerful and engaging moments in coaching. Last in this part is a chapter on conducting coaching sessions with step-by-step checklists that allow new coaches to get a head start in navigating coaching sessions. Part III is titled Coach Development. Chapter 11 discusses coaching presence and introduces the being skills of coaching and their connection to the new pos- itive psychology manual of character strengths and virtues. Last but not least, we have a chapter on self- care to call coaches to walk the walk, and professional development, to encourage coaches to make the pur- suit of coaching mastery a lifelong journey. FEATURES A Quote at the beginning of each chapter sets the tone and gives a sense of purpose to the material. Chapter Objectives allow for a review of concepts that will be PREFACE xiv PREFACE charge and master health and well-being on a large scale. To get there, large numbers of professionals will need to learn and master the principles and practices of coaching psychology presented in this manual. The more dedicated we are to “walking the wellness walk” and to assisting others on the journey through dynamic, growth-promoting coaching relationships, the more probable that our dream will become a reality. Thank you for making the leap and working to become a world class coach who will make a big impact on the lives of many. We are delighted that you have joined the movement. We ask you to help us continue to define and meet the highest possible standards. Margaret Moore (Coach Meg) Bob Tschannen-Moran covered in each chapter. Throughout each chapter are relevant extracts from conversations and other pub- lished materials, providing more background and discussion of the material. Important! boxes provide further discussion of topics covered in the text and give need-to-know information that will help a coach as they move through sessions with their clients. Don’t Forget . . . boxes cover information that it is important for coaching professionals to remember as they learn their craft and begin building relationships with their clients. Review and Discussion Questions listed at the end of each chapter give readers a chance to prac- tice what they’ve learned and review pertinent infor- mation presented throughout the chapters. The publication of this manual helps us realize our vision which is nothing less than helping people take xv This manual represents the culmination of nine years of work by many colleagues and collaborators. The first iteration of our manual was developed from 2000–2002 by Margaret Moore in collaboration with Steven Jonas, MD; Gabe Highstein, PhD; Juli Compton; Sheryl Marks Brown; Kate Larsen; Joan Price; and Tony Rodriguez. Important contributions from others fol- lowed quickly and include Walter Thompson, PhD; Robert Rhode, PhD; Lori Gray Boothroyd, PhD; Pam Schmid; and Jessica Wolfson. Gloria Silverio led a com- plete editing of the manual in 2006, as well as bringing in significant and new content. TheLifeTrekCoachingteam,ledby Bob Tschannen- Moran and Erika Jackson, spearheaded an enormous effort in 2006 and 2007 to expand the curriculum by integrating tenets of positive psychology, strengths- based change strategies, nonviolent communication, and relational flow (the intuitive dance of coaching). They also led the effort to structure the curriculum in accord with adult learning theory and to align the cur- riculum with our certification process, creating won- derful checklists and guides that are incorporated into this manual. The final draft of this manual was reworked in 2007 and 2008 by Bob Tschannen-Moran and Margaret Moore, but we would not have completed the manual without the tireless efforts of the Wellcoaches opera- tions team to support all of us, led by the indefatigable and one-of-a-kind Jeff Cramer. We want to acknowledge all of the Wellcoaches faculty members who also serve as mentor-coaches, including Blaine Wilson, Christina Lombardo Ray, and Michael Scholtz, for their dedication to teaching and mentoring coaches to master coaching competencies and for calling us to continually refine the manual. Most importantly, our coach trainees have con- tributed continually to the evolution and presentation of coaching skills and processes. They have chal- lenged us to make them elegantly simple to practice and use. In fact, Chuck Schroeder, executive wellness coach, even created a streamlined version of a sample well-being assessment. All of us enjoy using these principles and practices every day to support both our own and our clients’ health and well-being. Not only have we all under- gone personal transformations, we are incredibly for- tunate to be the partners in the small and large trans- formations that our clients experience. It’s rewarding beyond compare. Coaching is our future. Margaret Moore Bob Tschannen-Moran ACKNOWLEDGMENTS xvii PART I CORE COACHING SKILLS 1 Chapter 1 Fundamentals of Coaching Psychology 3 What Is Coaching? 3 Why We All Need Coaching 4 What Coaching Isn’t: The Expert Approach 6 What Coaching Isn’t: The Therapy Approach 7 What Is Coaching Psychology? 8 What Brings Clients to Coaching? 9 The Process of Coaching 9 Training to Be a Coach 10 Professional Coach Code of Ethics 10 Liability and Scope of Practice 11 Appendix A: The ICF Code of Ethics 12 Appendix B: Suggested Readings 14 Chapter 2 Coaching Relationship Skills 17 Relationship: The Heart of Coaching 17 Establishing Trust and Rapport 18 Using Mindfulness in Coaching 21 Three Core Coaching Skills 22 Other Relationship-Building Tools 24 Some Do’s and Don’ts in Coaching 26 Qualities of Masterful Coaches 27 Appendix A: Examples of Open-Ended Questions 28 Appendix B: International Coach Federation Core Coaching Competencies 29 Chapter 3 Coaching Behavior Change 33 Introduction to Behavior Change 33 CONTENTS xviii CONTENTS Transtheoretical Model of Behavior Change 33 Stages of Change and Effective Coaching Skills for Each Stage 34 Helping Clients Move through the Stages of Change 39 More on the Transtheoretical Model (TTM) 40 Decisional Balance 41 Self-Efficacy 41 Operant Conditioning 42 Coaching Timelines 42 Mount Lasting Change 43 General Suggestions for Coaching Change in Light of the TTM 46 Appendix A: The Readiness to Change Quiz for Clients 48 Appendix B: Coaching Strategies for Stages of Readiness 49 Chapter 4 Appreciative Inquiry in Coaching 52 The Five Basic Principles of Appreciative Inquiry 52 The 5-D Cycle of AI 54 Using Appreciative Inquiry in Coaching 56 Solving Problems the AI Way: A Strength-Based Approach 58 Making the Coaching Program Interesting 60 Using AI to Transform the Coaching Relationship 61 Chapter 5 Nonviolent Communication and Motivational Interviewing in Coaching 63 Definitions 63 Understanding Motivational Interviewing 63 Principle One: The Empathy Factor 64 The Language of Empathy: Nonviolent Communication (NVC) 65 Principle Two: Developing Discrepancy 67 Principle Three: Rolling with Resistance 70 Principle Four: Support Self-Efficacy 71 Motivational Interviewing and Appreciative Inquiry 72 Chapter 6 Self-Efficacy and Self-Esteem 74 Self-Efficacy: The End Game of Coaching 74 Self-Esteem: The Bedrock of Coaching 78 Relationship Between Self-Efficacy and Self-Esteem 79 Conclusion 80 CONTENTS xix PART II COACHING TOOLBOX 83 Chapter 7 Client Assessments 85 The Value of Assessments 85 Reviewing a Well-Being Assessment 87 Physical Health Risks 88 Mental Health Risks 90 Discussing a Well-Being Assessment 90 Additional Assessments for Coaching 93 Appendix A: Sample Well-Being Assessment 96 Appendix B: Mental Health Indicators 102 Appendix C: Physician Medical Release for Health, Fitness,  or Wellness Coaching 103 Chapter 8 Vision, Planning, and Goals 104 Introduction to Health, Fitness, and Wellness Planning 104 The Importance of a Compelling Vision 104 Examples of Visions 105 Behavioral Goals Make Visions Real 107 Three-Month Behavioral Goals 108 Weekly Behavioral Goals 109 Behavioral Goals Are SMART Goals 110 The Role of Brainstorming in Goal Setting 112 The Importance of Motivation in Goal Setting 112 The Power of Accountability in Goal Setting 113 Assessment of Behavioral Goal Achievement 113 Tracking and Measuring Outcomes Progress 114 Setting Outcomes Baselines 114 Putting It All Together 116 Chapter 9 Generative Moments in Coaching 120 Definitions and Acronyms 120 Understanding and Recognizing Generative Moments 120 Generative Moments Engage Every Coaching Skill 123 Facilitating Generative Moments 124 Relational Flow in Generative Moments 129 xx CONTENTS Chapter 10 Conducting Coaching Sessions 132 Introduction 132 Step-by-Step Guidelines for the First 45- to 90-Minute Coaching Session  (Creating a Vision, 3-Month Goals, and First-Week Goals) 132 Step-by-Step Guidelines for Subsequent 30- to 45-Minute Coaching  Sessions (Achieving Goals and Realizing a Vision) 141 What to Expect during the First 3 Months of Working  with a Client 144 Adapt Your Coaching Style to Client Learning Styles 145 Putting It All Together 146 Appendix A: Client Coaching Program Checklist 148 Appendix B: Coaching Program Feedback Survey 149 PART III COACH DEVELOPMENT 153 Chapter 11 Coaching Presence 155 Definitions 155 Understanding Coaching Presence 155 Coaching Presence as a Symphony of Strengths 156 The Presence That Generates Movement and Growth 160 The Being Skills of Coaching Presence 165 Conveying Coaching Presence 165 Chapter 12 Self-Care and Professional Development 168 Personal Wellness Foundation Tool: Six Facets 169 Setting Strong Personal Standards and Boundaries 169 Steps to Enforcing Boundaries 170 Preventing Burnout 170 Professional Development 171 Experience Coaching as a Client 171 Participate in Additional Training Opportunities 172 Coaching Career Vision 172 INDEX 174