The Coaching  Habit Say   Less, Ask More   & Change the  Way You Lead  Forever  b e s t s e l l i n g  au t h o r  o f  d o  m o r e  g r e a t  w o r k Stanier Michael  Bungay You Need   a Coaching  Habit 2 Everyone   now knows   that managers   and leaders  need to coach  their people. 3 T he leadership press has endless articles about it. Assorted  gurus suggest that coaching is an essential leadership  behaviour. The number of executive coaches seems to  be multiplying according to Moore’s Law. Even Dilbert  mocks coaching—and there’s no surer sign of mainstream suc- cess than that. Daniel Goleman, the psychologist and journalist who pop- ularized the concept of emotional intelligence, put a stake in  the ground more than fifteen years ago in his Harvard Business  Review article “Leadership That Gets Results.” He suggested  that there are six essential leadership styles. Coaching was one  of them and it was shown to have a “markedly positive” impact  on performance, climate (culture) and the bottom line. At the  same time, it was the least-used leadership style. Why? Gole- man wrote, “Many leaders told us they don’t have the time in  this high-pressure economy for the slow and tedious work of  teaching people and helping them grow.” t h e c o a c h i n g h a b i t 4 And remember, this was in the halcyon days of 2000,  when email was still a blessing, not a curse, globalization  was just warming up, and we hadn’t yet sold our souls to our  smartphones. My experience these days, working with busy  managers around the world, tells me that things have, if any- thing, got worse rather than better. We’re all stretched more  thinly than ever. And while “coaching” is now a more com- monly used term, the actual practice of coaching still doesn’t  seem to be occurring that often. And when it does, it doesn’t  seem to work. You’ve Probably Already Tried. And Failed. The odds are you’ve already come across coaching in some  form. Research in 2006 from leadership development firm  BlessingWhite suggested that 73 percent of managers had some  form of coaching training. So far so good. However, it seems it  wasn’t very good coaching training. Only 23 percent of people  being coached—yes, fewer than one in four—thought that the  coaching had a significant impact on their performance or job  satisfaction. Ten percent even suggested that the coaching they  were getting was having a negative effect. (Can you imagine  what it would be like going into those meetings? “I look forward  to being more confused and less motivated after my coaching  session with you.”) You’re probably  not getting  very effective  coaching, and  you’re probably  not delivering  very effective  coaching. t h e c o a c h i n g h a b i t 6 So, in summary: You’re probably not getting very effective  coaching; and you’re probably not delivering very effective  coaching. My guess is that there are at least three reasons why your  first go at developing a coaching habit didn’t stick. The first rea- son is that the coaching training you got was probably overly  theoretical, too complicated, a little boring and divorced from  the reality of your busy work life. One of those training sessions,  perhaps, where you caught up on your email backlog. Even if the training was engaging—here’s reason number  two—you likely didn’t spend much time figuring out how to  translate the new insights into action so you’d do things differ- ently. When you got back to the office, the status quo flexed its  impressive muscles, got you in a headlock and soon had you  doing things exactly the way you’d done them before. The third reason is that the seemingly simple behaviour  change of giving a little less advice and asking a few more  questions is surprisingly difficult. You’ve spent years deliver- ing advice and getting promoted and praised for it. You’re seen  to be “adding value” and you’ve the added bonus of staying in  control of the situation. On the other hand, when you’re ask- ing questions, you might feel less certain about whether you’re  being useful, the conversation can feel slower and you might  feel like you’ve somewhat lost control of the conversation (and  indeed you have. That’s called “empowering”). Put like that, it  doesn’t sound like that good an offer. 7 You Need a Coaching Habit But It’s Not That Hard. Really. At my company, Box of Crayons, we’ve trained more than  ten thousand busy managers like you in practical coaching  skills. Over the years, we’ve come to hold these truths to be  self-evident: •	 Coaching is simple. In fact, this book’s Seven Essential Questions  give you most of what you need. •	 You can coach someone in ten minutes or less. And in today’s  busy world, you have to be able to coach in ten minutes or less. •	 Coaching should be a daily, informal act, not an occasional, for- mal “It’s Coaching Time!” event. •	 You can build a coaching habit, but only if you understand and  use the proven mechanics of building and embedding new  habits. But why bother to change things up? Why would you want to  build a coaching habit? Here’s Why It’s Worth the Effort The essence of coaching lies in helping others and unlocking  their potential. But I’m sure you’re already committed to being  helpful, and that hasn’t led to your coaching more often. You’re already  committed to  being helpful,  and that  hasn’t led to  your coaching  more often. So let’s look at why coaching others helps you. It lets you  work less hard and have more impact. When you build a coach- ing habit, you can more easily break out of three vicious circles  that plague our workplaces: creating overdependence, getting  overwhelmed and becoming disconnected. Circle #1: Creating Overdependence You may find that you’ve become part of an overdependent  team. There’s a double whammy here. First, you’ve trained  your people to become excessively reliant on you, a situation  that turns out to be disempowering for them and frustrating for  you. And then as an unwelcome bonus, because you’ve been so  successful in creating this dependency that you now have too  much work to do, you may also have become a bottleneck in  the system. Everyone loses momentum and motivation. The  more you help your people, the more they seem to need your  help. The more they need your help, the more time you spend  helping them. Building a coaching habit will help your team be more self-  sufficient by increasing their autonomy and sense of mastery  and by reducing your need to jump in, take over and become  the bottleneck. Circle #2: Getting Overwhelmed You may also be overwhelmed by the quantity of work you have.  It doesn’t matter if you’ve mastered all the productivity hacks in  9 You Need a Coaching Habit t h e c o a c h i n g h a b i t 10 the world; the faster you dig, the faster the world keeps flooding  in. As you’re pulled in different directions by proliferating pri- orities, distracted by the relentless ping of email and hustling  from meeting to meeting, you lose focus. The more you lose  focus, the more overwhelmed you feel. The more overwhelmed  you feel, the more you lose focus. Building a coaching habit will help you regain focus so you  and your team can do the work that has real impact and so you  can direct your time, energy and resources to solving the chal- lenges that make a difference. Circle #3: Becoming Disconnected Finally, you may be disconnected from the work that matters.  My previous book Do More Great Work had as its foundation the  principle that it’s not enough just to get things done. You have to  help people do more of the work that has impact and meaning.  The more we do work that has no real purpose, the less engaged  and motivated we are. The less engaged we are, the less likely  we are to find and create Great Work. Building a coaching habit will help you and your team  reconnect to the work that not only has impact but has mean- ing as well. Coaching can fuel the courage to step out beyond  the comfortable and familiar, can help people learn from their  experiences and can literally and metaphorically increase and  help fulfil a person’s potential. What people   think of as the   moment of dis- covery is really  the discovery   of the question.  Jonas Salk t h e c o a c h i n g h a b i t 12 So you’re up against the Bind, the Grind and the Resigned. And  building a coaching habit is a way of breaking through to a bet- ter way of working. The Seven Essential Questions At the heart of the book are seven questions that will break you  out of these three vicious circles and elevate the way you work.  The questions work not only with your direct reports but also  with customers, suppliers, colleagues, bosses and even (occa- sionally and, obviously, with no guarantees offered) spouses  and teenage children. These questions have the potential to  transform your weekly check-in one-to-ones, your team meet- ings, your sales meetings and (particularly important) those  non-meeting moments when you just bump into someone  between scheduled events. The Kickstart Question is the way to start any conversation  in a way that’s both focused and open. The AWE Question—the  best coaching question in the world—works as a self-manage- ment tool for you, and as a boost for the other six questions  here. The Focus Question and the Foundation Question are about  getting to the heart of the challenge, so you’ve got your atten- tion on what really matters. The Lazy Question will save you  hours, while the Strategic Question will save hours for those  you’re working with. And the Learning Question, which pairs  12 13 You Need a Coaching Habit with the Kickstart Question to make the Coaching Bookends,  will ensure that everyone finds their interactions with you more  useful. Shall We Begin? Are you ready to go? I’m sure you’re keen to get to the Seven  Essential Questions, but before we go there, we’re going to  take a short detour into the nitty-gritty of how to change your  behaviour. There’s no point in giving you useful tools unless  you can put them into action. The next chapter, on the New  Habit Formula, helps with that. In it you’ll learn why the start- ing place for a new habit isn’t the new behaviour after all, why  sixty seconds matter so much and how the New Habit Formula  can be your engine for focused behaviour change. 1: The  Kickstart Question 36 In which   you discover   the power of an  opening question  that gets the  conversation  happening fast  and deep. 37 Breaking the Ice A  good opening line can make all the difference. “It was   	 the best of times, it was the worst of times . . .” “A   	 	 long time ago in a galaxy far, far away. . .” “Did it   	 	 	 hurt when you fell from heaven?” One of the reasons managers don’t coach more often than  they do is that they don’t know how to start. There’s that nag- ging sense that if you could just get going, you’d be fine. But  how do you get going? And if you’ve ever felt stuck in a con- versation that seemed a little superficial or boring or simply  not that useful, then one of these three situations might be at  play: the Small Talk Tango, the Ossified Agenda, or the Default  Diagnosis. The Small Talk Tango Make no mistake, there’s a place for small talk. It’s a way of  reconnecting and engaging with a person, of building rela- tionships, of remembering that other people are human and  t h e c o a c h i n g h a b i t 38 reminding them that you’re human, too. And yet you’ve felt  that sinking feeling when you realize that you’ve used up eight  of your fifteen allotted minutes talking trivia. Those moments  when you think, Seriously, do we always need to discuss that, say,  it’s cold and snowing in Canada during the winter? Or that sports  team, will they ever get any better? Small talk might be a useful  way to warm up, but it’s rarely the bridge that leads to a conver- sation that matters. The Ossified Agenda This situation is commonly found in standing meetings—same  time, same people, same place, same agenda. It becomes a  dreary recitation of facts and figures, a report that sheds little  light and seems to drain energy from the room. The agenda  might have been perfect a week, a month or a year ago, but now  it’s putting process in front of what really matters. The Default Diagnosis There’s no question or conversation about what the issue is.  You’re sure you know what it is. Or they’re sure they know  what it is. Or maybe you both think you know what it is. And  so... bang! You’re off to the races, pursuing something that, if  you’re lucky, is approximately-ish the real topic. This response  is comfortable and feels like progress because you’re solving  something. But you’re in the wrong hole. Digging faster or  smarter isn’t going to help. 39 1: The Kickstart Question The Kickstart Question:   “What’s on Your Mind?” An almost fail-safe way to start a chat that quickly turns into a  real conversation is the question, “What’s on your mind?” It’s  something of a Goldilocks question, walking a fine line so it is  neither too open and broad nor too narrow and confining. Because it’s open, it invites people to get to the heart of the  matter and share what’s most important to them. You’re not  telling them or guiding them. You’re showing them the trust and  granting them the autonomy to make the choice for themselves. And yet the question is focused, too. It’s not an invitation  to tell you anything or everything. It’s encouragement to go  right away to what’s exciting, what’s provoking anxiety, what’s  all-consuming, what’s waking them up at 4 a.m., what’s got  their hearts beating fast. It’s a question that says, Let’s talk about the thing that matters  most. It’s a question that dissolves ossified agendas, sidesteps  small talk and defeats the default diagnosis. And once you’ve asked it, you can use a framework I call the  3P model to focus the conversation even further. But before we  go on to the 3P model, it’s useful to understand the difference  between two types of coaching. t h e c o a c h i n g h a b i t 40 Coaching for Performance   vs. Coaching for Development Some institutions distinguish between coaching for perfor- mance and coaching for development. Coaching for performance  is about addressing and fixing a specific problem or challenge.  It’s putting out the fire or building up the fire or banking the  fire. It’s everyday stuff, and it’s important and necessary. Coach- ing for development is about turning the focus from the issue to  the person dealing with the issue, the person who’s managing  the fire. This conversation is more rare and significantly more  powerful. If I ask you to think back to a time when someone  coached you in a way that stuck and made a difference, I’ll  bet that it was a coaching-for-development conversation. The  focus was on calling you forward to learn, improve and grow,  rather than on just getting something sorted out. The 3P model is a straightforward way to create focus, make  the conversation more robust and (when appropriate) shift the  focus to the more powerful level that’s coaching for development. Deepen Focus with the 3Ps The 3P model is a framework for choosing what to focus on  in a coaching conversation—for deciding which aspect of a  challenge might be at the heart of a difficulty that the person is  Call them  forward to  learn, improve  and grow,  rather than  to just get  something  sorted out. Answers are  closed rooms;  and questions  are open  doors that  invite us in.   Nancy Willard 43 1: The Kickstart Question working through. A challenge might typically be centred on a  project, a person or a pattern of behaviour. Projects A project is the content of the situation, the stuff that’s being  worked on. It’s the easiest place to go to and it will be the most  familiar to most of us. We spend our days finding solutions to  challenges, and our eyes are almost always on the situation at  hand. This realm is where coaching for performance and tech- nical change tends to occur. Often, the art is in knowing how  to start here and then seeing whether the conversation would  benefit from including one or both of the other two Ps. People Have you ever thought, Work would be easy if it weren’t for all  these annoying people? Surely it’s not just me. Certainly, situ- ations are always made more complex when you—in all your  imperfect, not-always-rational, messy, biased, hasn’t-fully-  obtained-enlightenment glory—have to work with others who,  surprisingly, are also imperfect, not always rational, messy,  biased, and a few steps short of full wisdom and compassion. When you’re talking about people, though, you’re not really  talking about them. You’re talking about a relationship and,  specifically, about what your role is in this relationship that  might currently be less than ideal. t h e c o a c h i n g h a b i t 44 Patterns Here you’re looking at patterns of behaviour and ways of work- ing that you’d like to change. This area is most likely where  coaching-for-development conversations will emerge. They  are personal and challenging, and they provide a place where  people’s self-knowledge and potential can grow and flourish.  And at the moment, these conversations are not nearly com- mon enough in organizations. It’s not always appropriate to be having a conversation with  this focus. Often enough, having only a project-focused conver- sation is exactly the right thing to do. Putting the 3Ps to Use “What’s on your mind?” you ask. “The [insert name of thing they’re working on],” they say. “So there are three different facets of that we could look at,”  you offer. “The project side—any challenges around the actual  content. The people side—any issues with team members/  colleagues/other departments/bosses/customers/clients. And  patterns—if there’s a way that you’re getting in your own way, and  not showing up in the best possible way. Where should we start?” It doesn’t matter which one they pick—it will be a strong  start to the conversation. And when they’re done discussing  that P, you can just take them to one of the other two Ps and ask,  “If this was a thing, what would the challenge here be for you?” 45 1: The Kickstart Question And you’ll likely have a deeper, more robust and richer  conversation. Build Your New Habit Here When this happens . . . Write out the moment, the person and perhaps the feelings that are  your trigger. The typical trigger for this question is the start of some sort of  conversation. Your direct report pops into your office for some  advice. A customer calls you up. Your boss summons you into  her office. A colleague sits down with you at lunch and asks if  you have ten minutes to talk. You have a regular one-to-one  with someone on your team. You’re feeling anxious because  the conversation hasn’t really got started even though it’s been  going for a while. The trigger could even be an email or instant  message from someone. t h e c o a c h i n g h a b i t 46 Instead of. . . Write out the old habit you want to stop doing. Be specific. The old habit could be doing small talk and more small talk,  moving straight into advice-giving mode, defaulting to the stan- dard agenda or telling the person what the topic of conversation  is. It’s likely to be something that’s less about curiosity and  more about your controlling the direction of the conversation. I will . . . Describe your new habit. 47 1: The Kickstart Question It’s likely to sound a lot like, “I will ask them, ‘What’s on your  mind?’” If the trigger comes in the form of an email or IM,  you’re allowed to just send a question in reply. Watch It Work Watch the short videos at TheCoachingHabit.com/videos to  deepen your learning and help turn insight into action. Starting Strong  “What’s on your mind?” is a terrific opening  question, but it’s not the only one. In this video, Michael shares  other options for starting your conversations more strongly and  more quickly. From the Box of Crayons Lab “What’s on your mind?” is the Facebook question. Or at least,  it was. And then it wasn’t for a while, as it was removed as the  prompt. And then, soon after, it was the question again. I’m  guessing Mark Zuckerberg and his team figured out that this  question was the best they had. So it’s a question that’s used by tens of millions of peo- ple every day to cue reflection and sharing. When we asked  t h e c o a c h i n g h a b i t Lindsay, our Box of Crayons researcher, to dig into the science  behind why the question works so well, she directed us to one  of the fundamental truths that neuroscience has laid bare: we  are what we give our attention to. If we’re mindful about our  focus, so much the better. But if we’re unwittingly distracted  or preoccupied, we pay a price. A 2010 study started by making the point that any time we  have something on our mind, it’s literally using up energy— even though it accounts for only about 2 percent of your body  weight, your brain uses about 20 percent of your energy. But more than that, what you’re holding in your mind will  unconsciously influence what you can notice and focus on.  When you’re thinking of buying a red Mazda, you suddenly  start noticing all the red Mazdas on the road. Whatever you’re  thinking about can also influence the choices you make, so you  might not, in fact, make the optimal choice. Asking the Kickstart Question works as a little pressure-  release valve and helps makes explicit something that might  be unduly influencing the way you work. The question releases  the challenge from where it may well be rattling around in a  slightly unformed and unclear way that is, unbeknownst to you,  narrowing the way you’re seeing the world. 48