Digital 
Article
Negotiation Strategies
Research: Being Nice in a 
Negotiation Can Backfire
Warm and friendly isn’t always the most lucrative approach. 
by Martha Jeong, Julia A. Minson, Mike Yeomans, 
and Francesca Gino
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Research: Being Nice in a 
Negotiation Can Backfire
Warm and friendly isn’t always the most lucrative approach. 
by Martha Jeong, Julia A. Minson, Mike Yeomans, and Francesca Gino
Published on HBR.org  /  September 06, 2019  /  Reprint H0554J
Catherine Ledner/Getty Images
Whether you are making a large purchase, working on a joint project, 
or discussing your next promotion, you’ll likely need to negotiate. At a 
very basic level, in fact, nearly every interaction we have is a negotiation
—an opportunity to persuade others to agree to an outcome we want. 
But what is the best way to go about persuading others? Should you be 
warmer or tougher? Friendlier or more aloof? Our recent research may 
provide the answer.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Research: Being Nice in a Negotiation Can Backfire
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Negotiation experts have long confirmed the intuition that being warm 
and friendly pays off at the bargaining table, leading us to gain 
concessions and capture a larger chunk of the value. A recent Harvard 
Business Review article entitled “How to Negotiate Nicely without Being 
a Pushover” made this point, as did legendary sports agent Ronald M. 
Shapiro’s book The Power of Nice: How to Negotiate So Everyone Wins—
Especially You!
Similarly, in our own research, we’ve found that people tend to believe 
niceness will buy them better deals. But when put to the test, this 
prediction turns out to be wrong.
Across four experiments with more than 1500 participants, we tested 
the economic and interpersonal implications of being warm and 
friendly in a negotiation. We examined the effects of communication 
style independent of the economics of the deal. (While the economic 
stakes might influence how you would communicate, we wanted 
to single out the true effects of communication style, rather than 
confounding them with economic-related factors, such as making a 
more lucrative offer.) So we varied whether participants communicated 
in a warm and friendly manner or in a tough and firm manner, while 
instructing them to make identical first offers and keeping track of 
concession patterns. We further simplified things by having them take 
part in a single-issue, or distributive, negotiation, where they were 
bargaining over the price of a specific item. (These are different from 
multi-issue, or integrative, negotiations, where the value is not fixed
and the “pie” can be expanded.)
One of our studies was a field experiment conducted via Craigslist.com, 
where price negotiations are common. We had a research assistant 
using a gender-neutral name (“Riley Johnson”) send messages from 
a fictitious gmail account to actual sellers of smartphones on the 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Research: Being Nice in a Negotiation Can Backfire
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

platform. We randomly varied Riley’s communication style in the 
initial message, but Riley always asked for an 80% discount from the 
sellers’ original price. We tracked whether sellers were willing to make 
a counteroffer lower than their original price and, if they did, we 
measured that discount.
We created message templates that used either warm and friendly 
language or tough and firm language. (We had three different warm 
messages and three different tough messages to ensure that our results 
were due to differences in communication style, not to specific wording 
of a particular message.) For example, one of the warm messages read:
Hi there—I’m happy to see your post about the phone. This iPhone 
matches what I wanted to buy – you must have great taste :). Is 
there any chance you could sell it to me for 80% of the listed price? 
Given the prices on similar phones currently for sale, I would really 
appreciate it, and it would help me out a lot! I live in the area, and 
I can come to meet you anywhere that is convenient for you. Please 
let me know by tomorrow if the price is ok for you—and thank you so 
much for your time and consideration. Hope you have a wonderful 
day. – Sincerely, Riley
And one of the firm messages read:
I saw your post about the phone! This iPhone matches what I wanted 
to buy. I’m willing to pay 80% of the listed price. Given the prices on 
similar phones currently for sale, I’m firm on that price. I live in the 
area, and I can meet you wherever. Let me know by tomorrow if the 
price is ok for you or else I’ll move on. – Riley
“Riley” emailed 775 sellers, sending warm messages to half of them, and 
tough messages to the other half. We stopped negotiations after this first
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Research: Being Nice in a Negotiation Can Backfire
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

message, so we wouldn’t hurt sellers’ chances of making a deal with a 
real buyer. If we received a response, we replied immediately saying, 
“Thanks for your reply, but I’ve decided to buy a different phone.”
We found that warm and friendly messages were just as likely to elicit 
a counteroffer as tough and firm messages (around a 31% probability in 
either case). But whereas firm messages got more active rejections, or 
outright no’s (24%), than warm messages (14%), warm messages were 
more likely to be completely ignored (54%) than firm messages (45%). 
And in this kind of online context, it’s arguably better to get an active 
rejection than to simply be ghosted, because with a rejection you at least 
get a response that you can then try to negotiate on.
When sellers did offer a discount, it was larger when Riley’s message 
was tough and firm. In particular, sellers were more willing to accept 
the 80% discount offer when it came from a tough buyer (about 13%) 
than from a friendly buyer (less than 9%). Because the average phone 
price in our sample was $435, these results imply that the tough and 
firm requests generated $35 more savings per phone than the warm and 
friendly requests.
It appears that being firm can sometimes lead to better deals, at least in 
a distributive negotiation, than being warm.
We then conducted a laboratory study, so that we could observe the 
entire negotiation process, not just the first offer and counter-offer. We 
brought 140 participants into the laboratory and paired them up to 
negotiate together anonymously online. They were randomly assigned 
to play the role of either a buyer or seller, and they were incentivized to 
reach the best deal for a bowl. Buyers were told to make the same first
offers and to use different communication styles.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Research: Being Nice in a Negotiation Can Backfire
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

For example, one participant instructed to be friendly wrote:
Hey there. So I’m looking at this beautiful sugar bowl, which I would 
love to have to complete my set. It’s the last piece I need to complete 
what a dear relative of mine used when we would spend time together 
and it would mean a lot for me to have it, but I don’t have so much to 
offer. If you’d be willing, I can offer $250 for it. Please let me know!
By contrast, one participant told to be tough wrote:
Hi! I want to buy this sugar bowl from you, and I can offer you $250 
for it. Do we have a deal?
These communication styles had a significant impact on their success. 
Warm and friendly negotiators ended up paying 15% more for the 
same item as compared with tough and firm negotiators. This is 
because sellers made more aggressive initial counteroffers and won 
more concessions from friendly buyers over the course of the 10-minute 
negotiation.
Tough buyers enjoyed the negotiation as much as friendly buyers, but 
were more satisfied with their outcome. And sellers didn’t seem to 
mind the tougher approach — they enjoy negotiating with both types 
of buyers equally. Thus, buyers did not seem to benefit economically, 
personally, or interpersonally from a warm and friendly style. Why not? 
Our results from analyzing the text of the negotiations suggest that 
sellers perceived their friendlier counterparts to be low in dominance 
and perhaps thought they could extract larger concessions from them. 
As to why sellers didn’t enjoy negotiating with warm buyers more, we 
speculate that it’s because these negotiations took longer or perhaps left 
the seller feeling guilty.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Research: Being Nice in a Negotiation Can Backfire
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Contrary to popular advice, it seems that a warm and friendly 
communication style can actually hold us back in this kind of zero-sum 
negotiation over price. But it would be interesting to look at how style 
affects integrative negotiations. Perhaps being nice is more effective
when expanding the pie versus dividing it. Future research should also 
consider whether gender and timing play a role in how communication 
style is received and reciprocated. For example, perhaps opening a 
negotiation with a tough, firm stance but ending warmly can help you 
win a better outcome while preserving camaraderie.
Although our findings highlight the clear economic costs of being 
“warm and friendly,” they do not imply that everyone should become 
a jerk. All negotiations are a combination of value-creating and value-
claiming, of making the overall pie bigger and securing a slice of it for 
ourselves. Negotiators should recognize that being nice may make it 
more difficult to claim a lot of value, particularly in a purely competitive 
context. However, that price may sometimes be worth paying. For 
example, if you are negotiating with a senior colleague over divvying up 
a trivial project, it might be worth getting clobbered in the short-term, in 
order to preserve the relationship for the long term. Negotiators should 
incur those costs knowingly and intentionally, instead of holding onto 
the assumption that being easygoing will lead others to return the favor.
This article was originally published online on September 06, 2019.
MJ
Martha Jeong is an assistant professor of management at The Hong 
Kong University of Science and Technology, where she researches 
negotiations, social judgments, and decision-making.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Research: Being Nice in a Negotiation Can Backfire
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
6
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Julia A. Minson is a decision scientist and an associate professor 
of public policy at Harvard Kennedy School of Government. Her 
research focuses on the psychology of disagreement: how people 
engage with opinions and decisions that are different from their own.
MY
Mike Yeomans is a post-doctoral fellow in the Department of 
Economics at Harvard University.
Francesca Gino is a behavioral scientist and the Tandon Family 
Professor of Business Administration at Harvard Business School. 
She is the author of Rebel Talent and Sidetracked.
@francescagino
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Research: Being Nice in a Negotiation Can Backfire
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
7
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
