Digital 
Article
Hiring and Recruitment
In Sales, Hire for 
Personality, then Train for 
Skill
Too many recruiters obsess over experience. Instead, focus on traits 
that can’t be taught. by Andris A. Zoltners, Prabhakant Sinha, 
and Sally Lorimer
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

In Sales, Hire for Personality, 
then Train for Skill
Too many recruiters obsess over experience. Instead, focus on traits 
that can’t be taught. by Andris A. Zoltners, Prabhakant Sinha, 
and Sally Lorimer
Published on HBR.org  /  August 29, 2012  /  Reprint H009BK
When it comes to hiring sales talent, most companies prefer to “buy” 
instead of “build.” A sales leader at a technology company recently 
told us: “We only hire experienced salespeople who can hit the ground 
running.” Leaders of these companies argue that hiring experience 
reduces training costs while allowing the company to gain outside 
perspective. In addition, salespeople with experience in the same 
industry bring customers and get quick sales.
But experience alone is not a sufficient predictor of who will be 
successful in a sales role.
Most companies have hiring profiles that identify the attributes that 
recruiters should look for. The best hiring profiles are specific to the 
sales role. Consider two profiles we saw recently for jobs in insurance 
sales and technical sales.
Here’s what the insurance company was looking for in its sales rep:
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  In Sales, Hire for Personality, then Train for Skill
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

• Knowledge of industry/sales process
• Computer skills
• High energy level
• Ability to work independently
• Presentation/communication skills
Here’s what the technical sales job required:
• Knowledge of business planning/solution sales
• Self-motivated
• Presentation/negotiation skills
• Team player
• Creative/intellectual capability
Some hiring profiles list as many as several dozen attributes. The list 
usually includes a mix of competencies (learned skills and knowledge) 
and characteristics (innate traits and abilities). In the insurance sales 
example, “knowledge of industry/sales process,” “computer skills,” and 
“presentation/communication skills” are competencies. A candidate 
could come into the job with these competencies, or she could learn 
and develop them after she is hired.
In contrast, “High energy level” and “ability to work independently” 
are characteristics. These traits are largely inherent to a person. 
Characteristics are difficult to teach and take long periods of time 
to develop; consequently, training and development programs have 
limited impact on characteristics. Similarly, with the technical sales job, 
a candidate could learn and develop the competencies “knowledge of 
business planning/solution sales” and “presentation/negotiation skills” 
after he is hired. But he will have difficulty becoming a “self-motivated,” 
“team player” with “creative/intellectual capability,” unless he has these 
characteristics to begin with.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  In Sales, Hire for Personality, then Train for Skill
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

You can develop competencies with the right training, mentoring, 
coaching, support, and motivation programs. But to get characteristics, 
you have to hire the right individuals. In the words of one sales leader, 
“You can’t send a duck to eagle school.” According to another, “Although 
you can teach a turkey to climb a tree, it’s much easier to hire a squirrel.”
The best sales force recruiting processes focus on screening for 
success profile characteristics first and foremost. Characteristics 
should be “knockouts” in recruiting. For example, if a candidate 
for the technical sales job doesn’t exhibit a minimum level of self-
motivation, team-orientation, and creative/intellectual capability, he 
should automatically be eliminated, even if his experience gives him 
outstanding knowledge of business and solutions sales, and strong 
presentation and negotiation skills. Especially when hiring experienced 
salespeople, it’s easy for recruiters to get distracted by competencies. It’s 
nice to have competencies, but you must have characteristics. Without 
the right characteristics, it’s highly unlikely that a candidate will be 
successful long term.
Bruce Nordstrom, ex-chairman of the department store known for its 
impeccable service, once said, “We can hire nice people and teach 
them to sell, but we can’t hire salespeople and teach them to be nice.” 
Experienced or not, an individual will only be successful in sales if 
he/she has the right characteristics — and characteristics are something 
you “buy” during hiring, not something you “build” by training.
To get those characteristics, you have to hire the right person.
This article was originally published online on August 29, 2012.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  In Sales, Hire for Personality, then Train for Skill
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

AZ
Andris A. Zoltners is a professor emeritus at Northwestern 
University’s Kellogg School of Management. He is a cofounder of 
the global business consulting firm ZS Associates and a coauthor of 
a series of sales management books, including The Power of Sales 
Analytics.
Prabhakant Sinha is a cofounder of ZS, a global professional-services 
firm.
Sally Lorimer is a principal at ZS, a global professional-services firm.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  In Sales, Hire for Personality, then Train for Skill
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
