Digital
Article
Negotiations
What Donald Trump
Doesn’t Understand About
Negotiation
by Deepak Malhotra and Jonathan Powell
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

What Donald Trump Doesn’t
Understand About
Negotiation
by Deepak Malhotra and Jonathan Powell
Published on HBR.org  /  April 08, 2016  /  Reprint H02T39
The next president of the United States will need to be an extremely
effective negotiator. Armed conflict, political deadlock, and diplomatic
crises abound. The president will be called upon to resolve the war in
Syria, manage complex relationships with Russia and Iran, handle hot
spots such as North Korea, Libya, and Ukraine, navigate competitive
tensions with China, and revive a modicum of bipartisanship in
Congress. Ironically, the only presidential candidate who has been
asserting his prowess as a great negotiator is someone who has precisely
the wrong instincts and experience for the types of conflicts the
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What Donald Trump Doesn’t Understand About Negotiation
Copyright © 2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

president will face. The Donald Trump approach to negotiation would
be not only ineffective but also disastrous — and there are clearly
identifiable reasons for this.
One of us was the chief British negotiator for Northern
Ireland, helping reach and implement the historic Good Friday
Agreement, which put an end to years of violence between Catholics
and Protestants. The other has advised on scores of multimillion- and
multibillion-dollar deals around the globe and is the author of a new
book, Negotiating the Impossible. Both of us have worked behind the
scenes in advising heads of state on negotiating armed conflicts and
political stalemates.
One question we often are asked is how negotiating in business differs
from negotiating through back channels, with defiant coalition
partners, in war zones, and in the shadow of severe mistrust and
hostility. One crucial difference is your goal. When you’re negotiating a
business deal, your job is to figure out how much money is on the table,
to consider all of the ways in which the deal could be structured, and to
find an agreement that will allow you to capture more or most of the
value that is being created.
That’s not how it works when you’re negotiating a high-stakes,
protracted, multiparty conflict that has escalated to potentially
devastating levels. There will not be multiple solutions from which to
choose. If you’re lucky, there is one deal that everyone can live with
— and there are countless barriers standing in the way of achieving even
that. Your job is not to convince or threaten the other side into accepting
your preferred solution, but rather to use everything at your disposal to
knock down the barriers that are making the conflict seem unsolvable.
In most cases you are not trying to beat the other side; you are trying,
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What Donald Trump Doesn’t Understand About Negotiation
Copyright © 2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

often in collaboration, to reach the one and only deal that can avoid
disaster.
This difference between buying real estate, for example, and ending
wars, building coalitions, structuring global agreements, and balancing
military and diplomatic leverage has serious implications for the kind of
negotiator a president should be. Consider these five features of
negotiating on the world stage and ask whether what we know of the
Trump approach and temperament is suited to surviving (much less
succeeding) in such contexts.
• Preconditions and ultimatums are usually bad ideas. However
reasonable your requests may seem to you, issuing them as blanket
ultimatums or as preconditions to engagement will typically create
unnecessary barriers to negotiation — or, worse, lead to destructive
escalation. Trump plays it differently. His precondition for
participating in a January Republican presidential debate on Fox
News — demanding that moderator Megyn Kelly be removed — had a
number of consequences, none of which helped his cause: The execs
at Fox dug in their heels, Trump was forced to miss the debate, he lost
to Ted Cruz in the Iowa caucuses three days later, and he had
to admit that skipping the debate may have cost him the victory.
Trump has said he would have dealt with Iran in much the same way
as he did Fox News — i.e., walk out if the country rejected his
preconditions to nuclear talks. He fails to mention that he showed up
at the next Fox News debate, where Kelly was a moderator.
• You don’t need an amazing deal — you need an implementable
deal. Combing through Trump’s rhetoric on the Iran nuclear deal, it is
hard to identify a single U.S. concession that he would have approved
of. According to him, we should have extracted an even better deal in
exchange for giving nothing. Perhaps Trump has examples of
business deals where that’s how things transpired. Nonetheless,
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What Donald Trump Doesn’t Understand About Negotiation
Copyright © 2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

unlike in most business contexts, breakthrough agreements in
international deals and disputes are not the end of a negotiation
— they are just the beginning. The Good Friday Agreement was
followed by nine more years of negotiations before it was
implemented. The Oslo Accords, between Israel and the Palestinian
Liberation Organization, were met with rejoicing in the mid 1990s, but
the failure to implement the agreement had disastrous consequences.
Just as counterproductive as a bad deal is the “great” deal that the
other side accepts only reluctantly or due to coercion; if they perceive
it to be unfair, it will never stick.
• They lose does not equal you win. Trump tells us “I beat China all
the time” and promises to “beat Mexico,” “beat Japan,” and so on. The
underlying belief, that negotiation is fundamentally a zero-sum game
in which only one side wins, is dangerously misplaced in the context
of protracted conflicts and complex international deal making. When
you negotiate with newly elected individuals on the other side of a
trade or security deal, for example, you are not just their adversary;
you are also a partner whose job is to help them think more creatively,
overcome mistrust, and, most importantly, sell the agreement to their
constituents. Trump has probably done business deals where he
“won” simply because the other side was inexperienced or negotiated
poorly. No deal with Iran, Russia, or China on any foreseeable issue,
however, will be devoid of mutual interests, and in no negotiation
with them will it be possible to judge U.S. success on the basis of how
badly we “beat” the other side.
• You have to help them save face. Even your most generous
proposals may be rejected if accepting them will make the other side
lose face. When the deal you offer is the only one that can help them
avoid economic or military disaster, it might be refused if they can’t
sell it as a victory. Trump does not understand these dynamics, as is
evident from his most consistently articulated foreign policy position:
building a wall on the border with Mexico and having the Mexican
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What Donald Trump Doesn’t Understand About Negotiation
Copyright © 2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

government pay for it. The backlash to this position reached a
crescendo when Mexico’s former president Vicente Fox announced
with force and profanity that Mexico was never going to pay for such a
wall. Trump’s response? “The wall just got 10 feet higher.” This seems
to be his way of saying, “If you reject my ridiculous opening offer, I
will escalate matters by making even more ridiculous demands.”
We’re not familiar with any legitimate business context where this
tactic actually pays off (although it can in poker, and on the set of The
Godfather).
• You have to have the courage to tell supporters what they don’t
want to hear. The record is clear that on almost every major issue —
including gun control, universal health care, abortion, and taxes —
Trump’s stated views have changed drastically over the years.
Although he is more than willing to say provocative things, he has
demonstrated not the courage of his convictions but rather the savvy
to pander to his latest audience. This does not work for a president,
who will deal with countries and entities that are perceived as
dangerous or evil and who will need to make the case for engagement
to skeptical or angry constituents. If you have never taken a stance
against what your supporters want to hear, you cannot hope to
negotiate effectively — or lead — when it matters most.
Throughout history, the U.S. people have done a remarkable job of
entrusting the handling of great crises to individuals of sound judgment
and temperament. President Lincoln led an aggressive military
campaign against the Confederacy to save the Union but had no desire
or tolerance for exacting revenge after the victory. President Kennedy
defused the Cuban Missile Crisis partially with the threat of military
engagement but more with profound empathy for Soviet Premier
Khrushchev’s perspective and constraints. President Reagan stood up to
what he considered the “evil empire,” but he was still willing to engage,
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What Donald Trump Doesn’t Understand About Negotiation
Copyright © 2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

collaborate, and negotiate with Mikhail Gorbachev in pursuit of mutual
interests.
These presidents, both Republicans and Democrats, understood that
effective negotiation requires not only strength and toughness but also
humility, empathy, and patience to find solutions, build and sustain
coalitions, de-escalate conflict, and achieve economic and military
objectives.
What lies ahead is not a real estate deal or a campaign rally or a hiring
decision on The Celebrity Apprentice. The U.S. president will be facing
the world of complex global concerns and grave matters of war and
peace. In this world, insults lead to escalation. Ultimatums lead to
impasse. Bankruptcy means people die. We need a president who
understands this.
Deepak Malhotra is the Eli Goldston Professor of Business
Administration at Harvard Business School and the author of
Negotiating the Impossible.
@Prof_Malhotra
JP
Jonathan Powell was chief-of-staff to former British Prime Minister
Tony Blair. He is the author of Talking to Terrorists.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What Donald Trump Doesn’t Understand About Negotiation
Copyright © 2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
6
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
