Digital 
Article
Negotiation Strategies
5 Reasons Good Deals Get 
Rejected
Offering something reasonable isn’t enough. by Deepak Malhotra
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

5 Reasons Good Deals Get 
Rejected
Offering something reasonable isn’t enough. by Deepak Malhotra
Published on HBR.org  /  April 14, 2016  /  Reprint H02TCD
It’s one thing to lose a deal because you were playing hardball. It’s an 
entirely different — and more frustrating — situation when the other 
side is rejecting even your reasonable offers. When genuine attempts 
at negotiating in good faith are failing, you need a new approach — 
but it doesn’t mean you have to get aggressive. The key to success is 
understanding why people will sometimes reject even fair or generous 
offers.
You didn’t justify it
It’s not enough that you tell them what you want; you have to explain 
to them why it is a legitimate request. No matter how reasonable your 
proposal may seem to you, if you fail to justify it, there is a good chance 
it will be ignored or rejected. I always remind my students and clients: 
Don’t let your offer speak for itself; tell the story that goes with it. If 
you want an exclusive negotiating period, why is that appropriate in this 
case? If you need more time to consider an offer, why should they agree 
to change the deadline?
You didn’t help them sell it internally
The person on the other side of the table might agree that your offer
is reasonable, but they will still reject it if they can’t sell it to others in 
their organization. You might deserve a higher salary, but how will they 
explain this exception to others who are not getting one? Your job is not 
simply to convince the person you’re negotiating with, but to help them 
be an effective ambassador for you when they are speaking to their boss, 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  5 Reasons Good Deals Get Rejected
Copyright © 2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

their board, their partners, or others who have a say in what happens. 
Keep an eye on all of the people who can influence the negotiation on 
their side, and help craft a narrative that will allow them to get the 
buy-in they need.
You didn’t respect their constraints
They agree that your demands are reasonable. They can convince 
everyone on their side that you deserve it.  But the answer is still no. 
Why? Sometimes the problem is that their hands are truly tied on key 
issues. They would be willing to give you more time to make a decision, 
but they are facing their own hard deadline. They would be willing to 
give you more money up front to seal the deal, but they have budget 
constraints. The key is flexibility: If you give the other side more than 
one way of improving the offer, it is possible that they will be able to find
a way to do it. This is why I remind my students and clients: the more 
currencies you allow someone to pay you in, the more likely you are to 
get paid.
You didn’t help them save face
People will often reject even fair and generous offers if accepting them 
will make them look bad. If the other side has promised their audience 
(e.g., a boss, the media, their constituents) that they will be able to get 
a great outcome, and now the best they can deliver is considerably less, 
they might walk away from the deal even though doing so is costly. The 
key is to never force people to choose between making smart decisions 
and saving face. For example, even a symbolic concession on your part 
that gives them something they would not have otherwise expected can 
help them declare victory to their side — or at least help them show that 
all sides had to give in.
You didn’t offer closure
Why should they agree to one of your requests if this will just embolden 
you to make more? Why improve their offer if you will just shop it 
around to get other competitive offers? One concern people can have is 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  5 Reasons Good Deals Get Rejected
Copyright © 2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

that even agreeing to your demands will not seal the deal — and this can 
make them unwilling to expend the time and political capital to make 
the changes or improvements you are proposing. If it is genuinely the 
case, it can help you to let them know that “this gets the deal done.” 
Or, if you still need time, you might be able to at least assuage some 
concerns by letting them know that “we would accept that as your final
offer.” The thing to remember is that you don’t always need to make a 
substantive concession in exchange for the concession you are asking. 
If they are worried that you are still shopping around, or that you will 
continue to pick apart the deal, even an assurance of closure can be 
traded for substantive concessions.
This article was originally published online on April 14, 2016.
Deepak Malhotra is the Eli Goldston Professor of Business 
Administration at Harvard Business School and the author of 
Negotiating the Impossible.
@Prof_Malhotra
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  5 Reasons Good Deals Get Rejected
Copyright © 2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
