Digital 
Article
Sales and Marketing
In the Best Sales Teams, 
About Half of the People 
Are in Support Roles
Free your customer-facing staff to do their work. by Michael Viertler, 
David Sprengel, Sebastian Kuchler, and Jochen Ulrich
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

In the Best Sales Teams, 
About Half of the People Are 
in Support Roles
Free your customer-facing staff to do their work. by Michael Viertler, 
David Sprengel, Sebastian Kuchler, and Jochen Ulrich
Published on HBR.org  /  May 25, 2016  /  Reprint H02WUR
Sales reps are most effective when they have the right amount of 
support staff, but exactly how much support staff does a company need, 
and how should it be structured? Call it a Goldilocks quandary: Too little 
support, and your sales people can’t do their jobs well; too much, and 
you’re wasting money. But get it just right and your sales efforts can 
drive productivity and growth.
By looking at detailed sales data from 40 companies in technology-
related industries, we have identified guidelines for the optimal amount 
and type of sales support and management. This includes all non-
quota-carrying roles in the organization: customer-facing support, sales 
operations and administration, and sales management.
Evaluating our sample set of companies in hardware, machinery, 
industrial equipment, and information and communications 
technology, we have found a wide disparity in the amount of sales 
support that organizations employ. The efficiency of their sales 
departments, as measured by sales ROI (gross margin over total sales 
cost), also varies widely: The top 25% of companies we analyzed boast a 
sales ROI that is more than twice that of the bottom 25%. And these top 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  In the Best Sales Teams, About Half of the People Are in Suppo…
Copyright © 2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

performers have a 30% higher level of sales support than the rest of the 
companies.
Getting the structure and ratio of your sales support just right depends 
on four things:
Hitting the sweet spot of sales support. We found that devoting 
50%–60% of sales employees to support functions is optimal. Many 
companies with low sales ROI devote less than 30% of their sales staff
to support functions. But having too high a share of sales support 
has a negative impact on sales ROI, as it simply increases the cost 
base without adding additional support to the front line. Most of the 
companies with 60%–80% of sales support are in the bottom 75% of 
sales ROI.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  In the Best Sales Teams, About Half of the People Are in Suppo…
Copyright © 2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Sales efficiency can benefits from high levels of support in two ways. 
First, support frees up frontline sales employees to be more productive. 
A typical sales rep at one of the top companies we analyzed generates 
$5.7 million in gross margin; a typical rep at the other companies 
generates just $1.7 million. Second, companies in the sweet spot of 
support have a greater cost efficiency for their entire sales organization, 
because sales support staff are usually paid less than frontline sales 
reps. In our analysis, the top companies had a 15% lower average cost 
per sales employee than their peers.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  In the Best Sales Teams, About Half of the People Are in Suppo…
Copyright © 2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Getting the right composition of sales support. The makeup of sales 
support is just as important as its quantity. We found that the levels 
of operations and administrative support are what matters most. The 
top-performing sales organizations have roughly the same share of 
customer-facing support as their peers (30%) but twice the share of 
operations and administrative support (27% in top companies versus 
12% in their peers).
Sales operations and administrative support are sometimes a victim of 
overly aspirational cost-saving efforts. Yet they are invaluable because 
they enable frontline and pre-sales employees to spend more time with 
customers and to focus on sales and growth.
Nailing the ratio of nonmanagers to managers. Our analysis shows 
that the highest-performing companies have a ratio of nonmanagers 
to managers of around 8:1. Among lower-performing companies in our 
analysis, the ratio was greater than 10:1 or lower than 5:1.
When overseeing more than 10 people, a manager’s capacity to 
effectively supervise the sales staff decreases, dragging down ROI. On 
the other hand, managing fewer than four people translates into high 
costs (i.e., paying for more higher-wage managers).
Using digital to become “lean” across the entire sales process. Our 
experience has shown that maximizing the benefits of sales support 
requires companies to focus on building a fast-moving organization 
where some support activities are automated, streamlined, or cut 
entirely.
For example, companies can apply advanced analytic techniques, 
such as propensity-to-buy modeling and micromarket targeting, to 
help sales support staff do deal qualification much more efficiently.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  In the Best Sales Teams, About Half of the People Are in Suppo…
Copyright © 2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Digitizing sales planning is also a big opportunity to improve processes. 
One global high technology company digitized its sales planning 
process and reduced planning costs by 20%–25% in combination 
with 5% revenue growth through higher accuracy. Digitizing support 
activities can improve the process of matching sales bids with the right 
sales reps and reduce the required time spent per bid by up to 50%.
When a company gets these four things right, the results speak for 
themselves. The European sales organization of a global electronics 
brand saw impressive results when it committed to improving sales 
staffing ratios and digitizing sales support processes. Before the 
initiative, its sales reps were suffering from a lack of time for real 
selling. Up to 70% of their efforts were in administrative and back-
office tasks. Additionally, there was no common sales support and 
management structure. Most sales support activities were performed 
independently and inconsistently for each country, resulting in a lack of 
standardization and repeated bid and proposal activities.
To change this, the company adjusted its sales support functions and 
manager oversight to the ideal ratios we’ve outlined. Sales leadership 
created a European shared service center and consolidated activities 
such as order handling, credit checking, license registration, receivables 
management, and invoicing. Other activities that required complex 
interactions with customers or quick turnaround times — such as lead 
qualification, disputes management, and credits management — were 
kept in local sales offices, where they would be closer to the customer. 
Time spent on customer-facing sales activities increased from 30% to 
around 50%.
The payoffs came in additional revenues and reduced costs. The 
company experienced a 5%–10% increase in win rates through 
improvements in customer satisfaction, and up to a 40% reduction in 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  In the Best Sales Teams, About Half of the People Are in Suppo…
Copyright © 2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

the time needed to close deals. Due to the bundling of tasks in the 
shared service center and the harmonization of tools and IT systems 
across markets, there was up to a 30% decrease in sales operations 
costs and a continuous annual productivity improvement of 2%–3%, 
especially in frontline activities.
Sales support is critical. Only by putting in place and optimizing the 
right types and levels of support can companies hope to get the greatest 
growth from their sales organization.
This article was originally published online on May 25, 2016.
Michael Viertler is a senior partner at McKinsey in the Munich office
and coleads McKinsey’s global Sales & Channel Practice.
David Sprengel is a partner in McKinsey’s Munich office, where he 
focuses on commercial capabilities and go-to-market architecture for 
the Sales & Channel Practice.
Sebastian Kuchler is an engagement manager in McKinsey’s Sales & 
Channel Practice in the Munich office.
Jochen Ulrich is a knowledge expert at McKinsey based in the Vienna 
office, where he focuses on sales performance in the Sales & Channel 
Practice.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  In the Best Sales Teams, About Half of the People Are in Suppo…
Copyright © 2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
6
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
