Digital 
Article
Sales and Marketing
A Portrait of 
the Overperforming 
Salesperson
New research identifies their traits and behaviors. by Steve W. Martin
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

A Portrait of the 
Overperforming Salesperson
New research identifies their traits and behaviors. by Steve W. Martin
Published on HBR.org  /  June 20, 2016  /  Reprint H02YLM
What are the personal attributes, attitudes, and actions that influence
personal sales productivity? I recently conducted an extensive study 
of more than 1,000 salespeople and sales management leaders to 
determine the attributes of top sales professionals–those who achieved 
more than 125% of their assigned quota last year. This is a very select 
group as only 15% of the study participants met the criterion.
About one-third were field salespeople, one-third were inside 
salespeople, and the remainder were mid-level sales managers and top-
level vice presidents of sales. They’ve been in sales an average of 16 
years and have achieved the annual quota that was assigned to them 
88% of the time over the course of their careers. This is 22% higher 
than the average of study participants who achieved less than 75% of 
their quota last year. Moreover, the study results help us understand the 
attributes in six key areas that influence their success.
Focus. It’s not surprising to find that top sales professionals are 
motivated by money. Sixty-six percent agreed with the statement 
“Money is extremely important to me and how I measure my personal 
success,” while only 10% disagreed. But they are also motivated by 
status and recognition. A staggering 84% of top sales professionals 
indicated that being respected and recognized as one of the best by 
peers at their company is very important to them.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  A Portrait of the Overperforming Salesperson
Copyright © 2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

When asked to select how they describe their personal focus, 42% 
believe they are a likable person who makes customers feel comfortable, 
and 32% consider themselves very dependable and good at prioritizing 
their time. Twenty-six percent believe that their knowledge is their 
most powerful attribute, and this group had the highest average quota 
attainment last year at 170%.
Career orientation. Top sales professionals think about work a lot. In 
fact, they find themselves thinking about their job over half of their 
free time on weeknights and weekends. In addition, they’re goal and 
outcome focused. Fifty percent said they were the type of person who 
keeps a written or mental list of goals they want to accomplish and 36% 
indicated they’re frequently thinking about what the future will be like 
in five, ten, or more years. Only 13% described themselves as the type of 
person who lives life one day at a time.
Their responses to the fundamental reason as to why they went into 
sales were fairly evenly split. Twenty-seven percent wanted to control 
their own destiny, and 27% indicated the harder they worked, the more 
money they could make. Twenty-six percent said sales suited their 
personality, and for 19%, a career in sales just happened naturally.
Personal attributes. Do childhood experiences influence sales success? 
The results indicate they do as 72% of top sales professionals remember 
their childhood fondly as a generally happy time while only 9% 
disagreed with that statement. When asked which school subject 
was their favorite, 29% selected history, 23% selected science, 23% 
selected math, 13% selected physical education, 9% selected language 
or composition, and only 3% selected art.
When asked how they make important decisions that impact their lives, 
40% said their decisions are based on more logic than instinct, 30% use 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  A Portrait of the Overperforming Salesperson
Copyright © 2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

equal parts logic and instinct, and 30% use more instinct than logic. 
The average annual quota attainment for those who use more logic than 
instinct and those who use more instinct than logic was exactly the 
same, while quota attainment for those who use equal parts logic and 
instinct was 7% higher.
Seventy-two percent of top sales professionals prefer a wide variety of 
activities as opposed to daily routines. Only 8% prefer a daily routine, 
while 20% had no preference.
Customer interaction strategy. The top sales professionals ranked five
different sales strategies based on their effectiveness. The top-ranked 
strategies were “Getting customers to emotionally connect with you” 
followed by “Tailoring your sales pitch to the customer’s needs” and 
then “Asking questions that show your expertise.” The two lowest 
ranked strategies were “Showing the value of your solution” and 
“Driving the topics of conversation.”
When surveyed about which customer interaction statement they 
agreed with most, 49% indicated that likability was an important 
differentiator between themselves and their competitors. Conversely, 
45% agreed with the statement “Sometimes you have to point out that 
what customers are doing is wrong and proverbially tell them their 
baby is ugly.”  In other words, sometimes you have to be provocative 
and confront the customer’s belief system. Only 6% concurred with the 
statement that challenging the customer’s point of view will make the 
customer feel too uncomfortable.
What type of relationship do they have with customers after the 
sale?  Thirty-six percent responded they feel personally responsible and 
dedicate themselves to ensuring the client’s success, while 26% have 
less-personal but cordial relationships with their clients because they 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  A Portrait of the Overperforming Salesperson
Copyright © 2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

are both very busy. Twenty-two percent keep a general pulse on what’s 
happening with the customer after the sale. Contrary to what many 
people think of as a requirement for sales success, only 17% develop 
very close personal friendships with their clients.
Attitude. The study participants were also asked to complete word 
associations to allow a better understanding of their workplace 
attitudes. The written answers were then categorized as having a 
positive connotation, a negative connotation, or a neutral connotation, 
which was neither bad nor good. For example, 53% of the associations to 
the term “sales manager” were positive, and the top three answers were 
“coach,” “leader,” and “mentor.” Twenty-seven percent of the answers 
were negative, and the two most frequently mentioned were “pain” and 
“overhead.” Twenty-eight percent were neutral, and the most frequently 
cited  words were “management” and “forecast.”
Forty-two percent of the answers for “sales process” were positive 
associations, with the most frequently mentioned term being 
“important.” Thirty-seven percent were neutral words, and the top 
answer was “methodology,” while 21% were negative, with the top-
mentioned word being “long.”
Self-perception. When they selected from a list of qualities they 
thought prospective customers admired most about them, the 
top responses were trustworthiness, professionalism, follow-through, 
product knowledge, and enthusiasm.  However, the definition of 
trustworthiness seems to be individually determined. For example, 7% 
agreed with the statement “If the customer’s best interest is served 
by slightly obscuring the facts that’s OK.” Twenty-one percent agreed 
with “Subtle manipulation is reasonable, so long as the truth is served.” 
Thirty-four percent agreed with “You don’t have to point out every 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  A Portrait of the Overperforming Salesperson
Copyright © 2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

blemish of your product” and 36% with “Nothing but the whole truth 
is acceptable.”
Perhaps the most interesting part of the study is the verbal perception 
of top sales professionals and how they described themselves when 
compared with those who achieved less than 75% of their quota. When 
presented with the same list of twenty choices, the most frequently 
selected answers for those under 75% of their quota were responsible, 
likable, confident, empathetic, smart, and humble. The answers for top 
sales professionals over 125% of their quota were confident, X-factor (a 
combination of all the traits listed), quick-witted, likable, responsible, 
and productive. Clearly, this shows that top sales professionals have a 
different level of self-confidence, personal certainty, and pride.
This article was originally published online on June 20, 2016.
SM
Steve W. Martin teaches sales strategy at the University of Southern 
California Marshall School of Business. His new book is titled Heavy 
Hitter I.T. Sales Strategy: Competitive Insights from Interviews with 
1,000+ Key Information Technology Decision Makers.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  A Portrait of the Overperforming Salesperson
Copyright © 2016 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
