Digital 
Article
Managing Yourself
How to Improve Your Sales 
Skills, Even If You’re Not a 
Salesperson
Listen more than you talk. by Rebecca Knight
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

How to Improve Your Sales 
Skills, Even If You’re Not a 
Salesperson
Listen more than you talk. by Rebecca Knight
Published on HBR.org  /  May 22, 2017  /  Reprint H03OA0
Jordan Lye/Getty Images
At some point in your career, even if you’re not a salesperson, you’re 
going to have to sell something — whether it’s your idea, your team, 
or yourself. So how can you improve your sales skills, especially if you 
don’t pitch people often? What should you focus on first? And what 
should you do if you lose a sale?
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Improve Your Sales Skills, Even If You’re Not a Salesper…
Copyright © 2017 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

What the Experts Say
Selling has a bad rap, says Thomas Steenburgh, professor at the 
University of Virginia Darden School of Business. “Very few parents 
say they want their kids to grow up to be a salesperson,” he says. 
His MBA students are no different. “Many of them tell me that sales 
is something they never want to do in their careers.” And yet, he 
says, “Sales is the most fundamental skill.” Scott Edinger, the founder 
of Edinger Consulting Group and the author of The Hidden Leader, says 
that the resistance to sales stems from an “antiquated idea that selling 
is pushing people to buy something they don’t want, don’t need, or can’t 
afford.” But that notion is outdated. “Selling is moving somebody else 
to action,” he says. And that is part and parcel of professional life. “If 
you look at things you do over the course of your day, from internal 
meetings with colleagues to clients calls, almost all of your interactions 
involve some form of selling.” Here’s how to get better at it.
Reflect. Getting comfortable with sales requires an “understanding of 
what selling is,” says Edinger. Move beyond the used car salesman 
cliché. “Selling is not about putting undue pressure on and talking 
incessantly,” all while “wearing a light blue polyester suit,” he says. 
Rather, selling “is persuading, inspiring, and leading.” Your goal is “to 
work in collaboration” with a client or colleague “to drive change.” 
To get into the right mindset, Steenburgh recommends reflecting on 
your past positive experiences as a customer. “When you think about 
the best sales interactions you’ve had in your life, it’s almost like the 
salesperson wasn’t there,” he says. The seller was just “a person who’d 
taken a genuine interest in your problem and was helping you solve it.”
Put yourself in your counterpart’s shoes. “People buy for two reasons,” 
says Steenburgh. They either have a business problem that needs to be 
solved or they have a personal need, such as a desire to move up in the 
organization” that your idea helps accelerate. It’s your job to figure out 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Improve Your Sales Skills, Even If You’re Not a Salesper…
Copyright © 2017 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

your customer’s motivations: “What would it take to get your boss to 
sign offoff on a project or to get your clients excited about what you have to 
offer?” says Edinger. Do your research by talking with the people you’re 
trying to win over, and others in the know, well in advance of making 
your proposal. Think about what information you need to uncover. “Be 
empathetic. Focus on understanding the other party — what they need 
to accomplish and how they measure success.” This will help you tailor 
your recommendations.
Plan and practice. Crafting your sales pitch should not be a solo 
endeavor. Edinger suggests enlisting “a trusted peer or manager” to 
“role-play” so you can “see what works and what doesn’t.” Your goal is 
“to understand how the flow of these conversations feels and sounds.” 
Your colleague can coach you on how you come across and how to 
improve your delivery. Steenburgh recommends practicing in front of 
novices. “Talk to someone who is not an expert in the field, such as 
your grandmother,” he says. “Her questions will help you frame the 
problem.” Chances are, your first attempt at a pitch will miss the mark. 
“People spend so much time in their own heads, thinking about their 
idea, that they fail to draw the connection to how the product will 
improve someone else’s life,” he says.
Stay calm and don’t brag. Even with meticulous preparation, pitches 
can go awry. Your adrenaline is surging, so you may end up talking 
too much or failing to get to the point quickly. There is no easy 
solution, says Edinger. His advice: “Chill out.” Try to “relax your facial 
expressions” and keep your body language confidentconfident and loose. Check 
your tone and pacing. “Nobody wants to be lectured. Be respectful” 
but not overly deferential, he adds. “Establish a peer-level interaction. 
You’re not begging on bended knee.” Another common problem, says 
Steenbergh, is “letting your ego get in the way.” Sometimes, you 
get caught up in “talking about your strengths, and not what your 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Improve Your Sales Skills, Even If You’re Not a Salesper…
Copyright © 2017 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

counterpart wants,” he says. “At best, the person gets bored. And worst, 
it sends a message that you’re [not right] for the job.”
Close the deal. Being good at selling means you both “understand 
the ‘customer’ and understand the path they need to go through to 
buy,” says Steenburgh. It’s rare that anyone will immediately bite upon 
hearing your pitch — no matter how brilliant it is. Your counterpart 
“might need to assess the financial impact of such a purchase,” review 
competitors, or check with a higher-up before signing off. Regardless 
of what that next phase may be, you should “ask permission to move 
forward.” He recommends saying something like, “Are you ready to take 
the next step? What else can I do to help you make this decision?” Be 
“flexible” and willing to brainstorm, says Edinger. Think about ways you 
can “work together in collaboration to improve a product, service, or 
idea.” If the answer is no, or not yet, use the opportunity to gently probe. 
“Is the new idea too threatening? Too difficult? Or too expensive?”
Think long term. Veteran salespeople know it’s possible that “you’re 
going to fail more than you will succeed,” says Steenburgh. “You 
just have to have the guts to keep moving forward.” To summon 
that courage, remind yourself “that it’s not always about you.” Your 
counterpart has to take many interests into account. Remember, too, 
that sales is rarely “a one-and-done deal.” If your pitch is unsuccessful, 
“go back to your target in three months and ask, ‘How’s it going? Are 
your needs being met?’ If they are, great, but if not,” you may have 
another shot. “Think about the big picture.”
Principles to Remember
Do:
• Your research. Figure out what’s important to your counterpart and 
what business problems they’re trying to solve.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Improve Your Sales Skills, Even If You’re Not a Salesper…
Copyright © 2017 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

• Role-play your pitch with a trusted colleague and ask for feedback on 
ways to improve your presentation
• Ask permission to move forward after your initial pitch by saying 
something like, “Are you ready to take the next step?”
Don’t:
• Tense up. Relax your facial expressions and keep your body language 
loose.
• Talk too much — and especially don’t brag. Focus on how you can help 
your counterpart.
• Beat yourself up if you’re unsuccessful. Think big picture. Stay in 
touch and look for opportunities to try again.
Advice in Practice
Case Study #1: Develop an understanding of your customer’s needs, 
and show empathic concern. Damian Vaughn, head of programs at 
BetterUp, a San Francisco–based company that connects employees 
with executive-level coaching, believes that being good at sales means 
that you understand both the “political and personal element” behind 
every buying decision.
“You need to be able to connect the dots between [your customer’s] 
business needs and their personal needs,” says Damian, a former NFL 
player turned entrepreneur. “And you need to show empathic concern.”
Earlier in his career, Damian worked as a management consultant. He 
wanted to sell his company’s organizational assessment and leadership 
development services to “George,” a CEO who had taken the reins of a 
technology firm poised for a great deal of change.
Before he developed his pitch, Damian did his research. “I needed to 
get a sense of the broader macroeconomic environment George was 
operating in,” he says.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Improve Your Sales Skills, Even If You’re Not a Salesper…
Copyright © 2017 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

He talked to George’s colleagues to develop a deeper understanding of 
the CEO’s personal motivations. The conversations were illuminating. 
“George was a seasoned CEO but not a veteran, and this was his first
transformation,” he says. “He wanted to deliver business results, but he 
also had a need for significance. He wanted to prove that he belonged in 
this orbit.”
In addition, George was eager to connect with his employees. “The 
people component was really important to him,” Damian says.
He used this information to tailor his pitch to George. It was subtle: 
“The messaging was that the success we were going to achieve would tie 
directly back to him,” he says.
Damian also demonstrated how his consulting services would allow 
George “to engage and collaborate with his employees. I showed him 
how everyone would feel connected.”
At the beginning of the pitch, Damian provided a brief overview of his 
company’s services. Then he paused. It was George’s turn to talk. “I 
listened to George’s vision and intentions,” he says.
After George was done, Damian presented his case. “Our solution was 
what I’m sure felt like a customized service,” he says. “It was what the 
business needed and what he wanted.”
George signed on, and the successful engagement lasted about 18 
months.
Case Study #2: Learn from mistakes and be willing to collaborate with 
your customers on a solution. David Neenan, president of international 
at TransUnion, a consumer credit reporting agency, often attends sales 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Improve Your Sales Skills, Even If You’re Not a Salesper…
Copyright © 2017 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
6
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

meetings at the C-suite level. “I am not a salesperson, but I have to 
represent the best of what we do and why it’s relevant,” he says.
Early on, he made mistakes. “I sometimes came in with too many ideas 
of where we might be helpful, and it overwhelmed the listener,” he says. 
“I have learned that sales takes discipline and that I need to pick and 
choose what to talk about once I understand the customer’s problem.”
Other times, “I left regretting that we didn’t make ‘the ask,’ or that 
we didn’t make it aggressively enough,” he says. Now he knows that 
the team needs someone in the meeting who is “not afraid to ask the 
customer to commit to a next step.”
He says he’s picked up a lot from TransUnion’s best salespeople, and 
from conversations with customers: “A client once said to me, ‘A good 
salesperson takes you where you want to go. A great salesperson takes 
you where you need to go,’ and it’s true,” he explains.
A few years ago, David was in a sales meeting with a big bank that 
wanted to cut its approval process for credit seekers to less than 10 
seconds.
“We understood that this was not going to be a quick fix, because we 
did not have an off-the-shelf solution,” he recalls. “We needed to take 
a couple of leaps forward and brainstorm with the client to see how we 
might build a model or framework to solve the issue.”
David enjoys this kind of collaboration. “I work in 30 countries, and I 
like sharing experiences from other markets by taking what we know 
works in Market A and applying it to Market B,” he says. “That’s 
when you start to use the word we, as in ‘We are solving the problem 
together.’”
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Improve Your Sales Skills, Even If You’re Not a Salesper…
Copyright © 2017 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
7
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

David and his team marshaled the internal resources to build a solution 
for the bank, and it signed with TransUnion.
This article was originally published online on May 22, 2017.
RK
Rebecca Knight is a journalist who writes about all things related to 
the changing nature of careers and the workplace. Her essays and 
reported stories have been featured in The Boston Globe, Business 
Insider, The New York Times, BBC, and The Christian Science 
Monitor. She was shortlisted as a Reuters Institute Fellow at Oxford 
University in 2023. Earlier in her career, she spent a decade as an 
editor and reporter at the Financial Times in New York, London, and 
Boston.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Improve Your Sales Skills, Even If You’re Not a Salesper…
Copyright © 2017 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
8
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
