Digital 
Article
Sales and Marketing
7 Reasons Salespeople 
Don’t Close the Deal
Based on a new study of B2B buyers. by Steve W. Martin
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

7 Reasons Salespeople Don’t 
Close the Deal
Based on a new study of B2B buyers. by Steve W. Martin
Published on HBR.org  /  August 02, 2017  /  Reprint H03TL3
Pretend that you’re an experienced buyer who has met with hundreds 
of business-to-business salespeople. What percentage of them would 
you say are excellent, good, average, or poor?
According to a new study of more than 230 buyers, 12% of salespeople 
are excellent, 23% good, 38% average, and 27% poor.
The bad news is that the underperforming salespeople lack the 
self-awareness to know that buyers don’t value them, nor do they 
understand why. They don’t take the time to figure out why they lost 
a deal or longtime client. They either don’t know why they weren’t 
selected or they reflexively blame it on factors out of their control.
Interviews with buyers illustrate seven important lessons about the 
mistakes salespeople make and why they lose business.
1. They are not trusted or respected. Customers can think of a 
salesperson as someone who is trying to sell something, a supplier 
with whom they do business, a strategic partner who is important to 
their business, or a trusted adviser whose advice is followed. Obviously, 
a trusted adviser enjoys significant advantages over the competing 
salespeople. However, just 18% of the salespeople buyers met over the 
past year would be classified as trusted advisers whom they respect.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  7 Reasons Salespeople Don’t Close the Deal
Copyright © 2017 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

2. They can’t converse effectively with the senior executives. While 
salespeople frequently meet with lower-level and midlevel personnel at 
a client company, the rare conversations they have with C-level decision 
makers directly determine whether they win or lose the deal. Therefore, 
it is critical for salespeople to understand how C-level executives think 
and to communicate with them in the language they use. Unfortunately, 
buyers report that fewer than one out of three salespeople can hold an 
effective conversation with senior executives.
3. They can’t clearly explain how their solution helps the buyer’s 
business. Buyers amass information that helps them justify their 
strategic decisions. In other words, a product’s strategic value comprises 
the reasons and arguments that buyers provide to senior management 
and others in the company about why they should purchase a product. 
Different strategic values include increasing revenues, decreasing costs, 
gaining a competitive advantage, and standardizing operations in order 
to reduce risk. However, buyers say only 54% of salespeople they 
meet with can clearly explain how their solution impacts the buyer’s 
business.
4. They are too self-centered. Study participants were asked to choose 
the primary reason they don’t like meeting with salespeople. Their 
answers reveal that they feel pressured by self-centered salespeople. 
Forty-four percent believed salespeople are only serving their own 
agenda, while 25% indicated salespeople only care about making the 
sale. Twenty-three percent were uncomfortable because it is difficult to 
say no to them, and 8% said salespeople are not the type of person they 
typically associate with. The lesson is clear. Instead of focusing solely 
on revenue, salespeople should concentrate more on helping buyers 
accomplish their goals.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  7 Reasons Salespeople Don’t Close the Deal
Copyright © 2017 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

5. They use the wrong closing strategy. Study participants were 
presented with different closing techniques in order to understand how 
they would respond. Overall, hard close techniques such as “This is 
the last time we’ll be able to extend this offer and we need an answer 
now” were rated least effective. A hard close creates a binary “yes or no” 
response from the buyer and is associated with a “take it or leave it” 
mentality. Soft close techniques such as “If you spend another $100,000, 
you will receive an additional 10% off the entire order” were rated most 
effective. A soft close is based on a suggestion that leads buyers to 
believe they are acting of their own free will, when in fact they have 
been directed to follow an action.
6. They don’t alleviate the risk of buying their solution. Business-to-
business buyers are fixated on risk mitigation because past interactions 
with salespeople have conditioned them to be skeptical. Therefore, they 
make vendors respond to immense requests for proposals, complete 
laborious evaluation spreadsheets, and document each product feature 
to prove it exists. Still, one of the primary reasons a purchase isn’t made 
after a lengthy evaluation is because the salesperson hasn’t alleviated 
the risk of buying.
Tolerance for risk fluctuates by function and by industry. Not 
surprisingly, IT and accounting have less risk tolerance than marketing; 
dynamic, creative fields such as fashion and media have more 
risk tolerance than government or health care. Salespeople should 
understand these dynamics as they seek to assuage buyers’ concerns 
about risk.
7. They can’t establish a personal connection with the buyer. There 
is an equilibrium point where the buyer respects the salesperson’s 
conviction and is not offended by their persistence, which enables the 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  7 Reasons Salespeople Don’t Close the Deal
Copyright © 2017 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

relationship to develop. Buyers cited five key reasons why there isn’t 
“chemistry” or a personal connection with a particular salesperson:
• The salesperson was too pushy.
• There was a difference in communication styles.
• The salesperson’s personality was much different from mine.
• The salesperson was too eager to befriend me.
• There was a difference in age.
Most salespeople are very comfortable selling to certain types of people. 
However, they’re far less likely to establish rapport with someone who 
is wired far differently than themselves. Since they’re not exactly sure 
how to behave, they act in a way the buyer considers too pushy, or they 
overcompensate by being overly friendly.
It’s not surprising that 81% of buyers indicated they would rather 
talk with someone who shares their same mannerisms. As a result, 
buyers will choose the salesperson who develops rapport over those 
who don’t. Ultimately, a salesperson wants to become a communication 
chameleon. Just as the chameleon changes colors to match its 
surroundings, the salesperson’s goal is speak the buyer’s language 
(industry, technical, and job function) in order to change a skeptic into a 
believer.
This article was originally published online on August 02, 2017.
SM
Steve W. Martin teaches sales strategy at the University of Southern 
California Marshall School of Business. His new book is titled Heavy 
Hitter I.T. Sales Strategy: Competitive Insights from Interviews with 
1,000+ Key Information Technology Decision Makers.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  7 Reasons Salespeople Don’t Close the Deal
Copyright © 2017 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
