Digital
Article
Negotiations
Research: When You Don’t
Have an Alternative in a
Negotiation, Try Imagining
One
by Michael Schaerer, Martin Schweinsberg, and Roderick Swaab
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Research: When You Don’t
Have an Alternative in a
Negotiation, Try Imagining
One
by Michael Schaerer, Martin Schweinsberg, and Roderick Swaab
Published on HBR.org  /  April 19, 2018  /  Reprint H04AIV
Yenpitsu Nemoto/Getty Images
Conventional wisdom suggests that negotiators need alternatives to
succeed. Alternatives give negotiators the confidence to negotiate offers
more ambitiously, to push for more optimal outcomes, and to walk away
from the table when needed. But negotiators often have no alternative
at all. For example, a recent survey by GMAC suggests that the average
MBA graduate only has a single job offer to choose from, suggesting that
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Research: When You Don’t Have an Alternative in a Negotiatio…
Copyright © 2018 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

many MBAs have to negotiate their job offer without an alternative to
fall back on.
So what can you do if you lack an alternative? How can you walk away
from the table with a better outcome?
In our recent paper, forthcoming in the Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, we found that negotiators can actually reap some of
the benefits that alternatives typically offer by simply imagining having
an attractive alternative.
The power of imagination
In earlier research we found that alternatives not only make negotiators
feel more powerful, they can also serve as high or low reference points,
helping to frame the negotiation. We wondered whether negotiators
needed actual alternatives to get these benefits, or whether simply
imagining one would be sufficient. Across seven studies, using samples
of over 2,500 MBA students, online participants, and working
professionals, we hypothesized that imagining an attractive alternative
offer would give them a reference point and motivate them to demand
more from their opponents.
In one study, 306 online participants were told to sell a second-hand CD
to a potential online buyer (fictitious) and make the first offer. The
participants were divided into three groups: one was told that a
different buyer offered $8 for the CD (a strong alternative); another
group had no alternative offer; and the third group was told to imagine
that they had secured a strong alternative – we asked them prior to the
negotiation to imagine what this alternative offer would look like, what
it would feel like to have this alternative, and how it would affect their
upcoming negotiation. Consistent with our hypothesis, negotiators who
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Research: When You Don’t Have an Alternative in a Negotiatio…
Copyright © 2018 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

mentally simulated an alternative made more ambitious first offers than
those with no alternative — $11.20 vs. $8.65 – though, not surprisingly,
they offered up less than those who had a strong alternative.
To assess whether the effects of imaginary alternatives carry over into
more profitable final agreements, we conducted another study with 300
laboratory participants, asking them to negotiate the price of a
Starbucks mug face-to-face with each other. They were grouped
similarly: some had an actual alternative, some had no alternative, and
others were told to simulate an alternative. We gave them an incentive
to negotiate as ambitiously as they could: they could earn the money
they made off the coffee mug and/or keep it.
There were two rounds in the negotiation. In the first round, all
negotiators were told that the price for the mug typically ranges from
€3-10 and we manipulated the presence or absence of an alternative.
Participants in the actual alternative group received a strong alternative
offer of €8. Participants in the imaginary alternative group did not
receive this alternative offer but were told to mentally simulate having
an attractive alternative first. Finally, participants in the control group
neither received an alternative nor the instruction to mentally simulate
one. All participants then proceeded to the next round, which involved
actually negotiating. We found that participants in the imaginary
alternative group demanded more in negotiating and sold their mugs
for $1 more compared to negotiators in the control group. We also found
that they performed almost as well as those with a strong alternative.
These studies show that mentally simulating having attractive
alternatives may help boost your aspirations and outcomes in
negotiations. This could mean thinking about what an attractive but
realistic alternative offer looks like, for example, for a product you’re
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Research: When You Don’t Have an Alternative in a Negotiatio…
Copyright © 2018 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

selling or an alternative job offer before you head to the negotiation
table.
Alternatives have to be good
Despite these positive effects of mental simulation, we also want to note
some important caveats. Our other studies demonstrated various
situations where imagining an alternative offer did not yield a better
outcome or potentially even backfired. First, we found that the type of
alternative simulated matters. When we asked negotiators to imagine an
unattractive alternative rather than an attractive alternative, they
performed much worse because doing so lowered their aspirations. This
is consistent with a previous paper of ours showing that negotiators can
be “weighed down” by the low anchor a weak alternative provides,
setting them up to fail.
Second, we found that who is imagining an alternative matters. In a
simulated job negotiation for a sign-on bonus, we had MBA students in
Singapore and France either play the role of a recruiter or job candidate.
We instructed either one or both negotiators to engage in mental
simulation before the negotiation started and instructed one to make
the first offer. We found that the benefits of mental simulation only
materialized when negotiators were able to make the first offer and
when their opponent did not also engage in this mental simulation.
Thus, imagining an attractive alternative is particularly effective when
you move first in a negotiation and when you’re the only one to use this
strategy.
In a final study, we found that mental simulation can also prevent
agreement when negotiators’ positions are difficult to reconcile, such as
when their price limits do not overlap. We had sellers of a restaurant
demand a higher price than buyers were able to offer. Both sides could
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Research: When You Don’t Have an Alternative in a Negotiatio…
Copyright © 2018 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

only come to an agreement if they uncovered additional features (such
as a job guarantee) that would “expand the pie.” Under these situations,
the more aggressive offers resulting from mental simulation
made negotiators actually more willing to declare an impasse rather
than come to agreement.
Although strong alternatives are important for a successful negotiation,
we often need to negotiate without the luxury of having them. Our
findings suggest that you can partially compensate for this lack of power
by mentally simulating a realistic but ambitious alternative. The key is
to have a good alternative top of mind, to make the first offer if possible,
and to have walkaway points that overlap.
Michael Schaerer is an Assistant Professor of Organizational
Behavior and Human Resources at Singapore Management
University’s Lee Kong Chian School of Business.
MS
Martin Schweinsberg is an Assistant Professor of Organizational
Behavior at ESMT Berlin.
RS
Roderick Swaab is a professor of organizational behavior at INSEAD
and the INSEAD Dutch Alumni Fellow in Leadership, Diversity, and
Governance.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Research: When You Don’t Have an Alternative in a Negotiatio…
Copyright © 2018 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
