Digital 
Article
Meeting Management
How to Handle an 
Emotionally Charged 
Negotiation
A tool to help leaders bring hidden issues to the table. 
by Greg McKeown
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

How to Handle an 
Emotionally Charged 
Negotiation
A tool to help leaders bring hidden issues to the table. 
by Greg McKeown
Published on HBR.org  /  December 15, 2023  /  Reprint H07V6D
Sean Justice/Getty Images
Conflict resolution in the workplace is a necessary, but often 
uncomfortable, part of being a leader. While the type of conflict can 
range from day-to-day workload squabbles to high-stakes business 
negotiations, these situations consistently require a leader to navigate 
layers of emotion, dig deep to surface hidden issues, and think fast in 
the face of curveballs. These are valuable skills that can take years, if not 
an entire career, to learn.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Handle an Emotionally Charged Negotiation
Copyright © 2023 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

If you can demonstrate an ability to comfortably negotiate tricky 
situations with patience, tact, and grace, then you can promote 
collaboration, empathy, and productivity in your teams. In unpublished 
research I conducted at the University of Cambridge, in collaboration 
with TruScore (a leadership assessment company headquartered in 
Denver), we analyzed data from 4,000 executives. We found that the 
item most strongly correlated with making a positive impact on an 
entire organization is a leader’s ability to be a trusted negotiator in 
business conflict situations.
In this article, I’ll share a simple process I followed when negotiating a 
valuable and vulnerable business conflict of my own.
A Three-Step Negotiation Guide
I once faced a stalemate in a negotiation regarding the ownership of 
my podcast. The production company that owned one-third of the show 
had approached me about selling their share. I said I’d love to buy them 
out and asked them to give me a number. That’s where the negotiation 
stalled, for months. I did not understand. It seemed like a simple win-
win. In a final effort to initiate direct talks, I sent an email with the 
following question:
“Are you willing to have a phone call together to see if we can find
a solution that is better than what either party wants right now? No 
compromises, both sides have to really win.”
We scheduled a meeting. Here are the steps I followed.
1. Prepare to have an empathetic and productive conversation.
Before the meeting, I used a tool that I call “The Can’t Lose Matrix” to 
draw out the issues I believed were hidden below the surface.
To use the matrix, you need to first ask yourself four questions:
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Handle an Emotionally Charged Negotiation
Copyright © 2023 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

• What is my counterpart’s desired win?
• What can’t they lose?
• What is my desired win?
• What can’t I lose?
In this case, I knew that the production company’s desired win was to 
stop producing the show so they could focus their resources elsewhere. 
I also knew they didn’t want to lose their partial ownership in the first
100 episodes they had invested in creating, although I didn’t know why. 
This was the unresolved bottleneck.
My desired win was to keep my subscriber list because it would take 
so long to rebuild it. I also knew that I didn’t want to lose my ability 
to create content independently and without oversight. This was in 
jeopardy because if the production company continued to have partial 
ownership, then they would continue to have a say in the show’s content 
direction.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Handle an Emotionally Charged Negotiation
Copyright © 2023 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

See more HBR charts in Data & Visuals on HBR.org.
This matrix draws upon a compelling body of research that establishes 
one of the strongest findings in the social sciences: that, as social 
psychologist Roy F. Baumeister and his coauthors put it, bad is stronger 
than good. Put simply, people are often more interested in avoiding loss 
than in potential gains (a phenomenon ably explored by organizational 
psychologist Robert I. Sutton in his article “Bad is Stronger Than Good: 
Evidence-Based Advice For Bosses,” which builds on Daniel Kahneman 
and Amos Tversky’s seminal work in “Prospect Theory”). As a leader, 
you can use this concept in practice by asking questions to fully 
understand what each party fears losing in any given conflict.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Handle an Emotionally Charged Negotiation
Copyright © 2023 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

2. Engage in the conversation with a desire to understand.
I began the meeting by expressing my desire to fully understand what 
they wanted to win and what they couldn’t lose. I listened to them 
closely and restated their position. They confirmed the win that really 
mattered to them: to stop producing the show. Then I said, “Help me 
understand why you won’t sell your portion of the show to me.”
They explained it this way: They would be willing to sell it to me 
but only for a fee far above its market value. Keeping this asset was 
disproportionately valuable to their portfolio as a company. This was the 
missing piece of information that needed to be drawn out to resolve the 
bottleneck.
3. Formulate a direct negotiation question.
The next and final step was using what I identified in “The Can’t Lose 
Matrix” to create the following question at the negotiating table:
Is there a way that we can [your counterpart’s desired win] and avoid 
[your counterpart’s can’t lose] while also [your desired win] and avoiding 
[your can’t lose]?
In my case, the question we needed to negotiate was:
Is there a way that the production company could stop producing 
this show while still having access to the first 100 shows, while I 
maintain access to the subscriber list and the ability to create content 
independently from this point forward?
After voicing that one question, we were playing on the same field. We 
worked together to come up with creative solutions that helped us to 
win without threatening the things we could not lose. What had been 
stalled for months via unanswered emails was solved in a 45-minute 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Handle an Emotionally Charged Negotiation
Copyright © 2023 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

face-to-face meeting using three simple steps. It was a success story for 
all involved.
. . .
I once heard a story about a group of children who attended school next 
to a busy highway. At recess, they stayed huddled close to the school 
because of their fear of the roads. Then, someone put up fences at the 
school and the children were able to play on the entire playground and 
fields, right up to the edge of the school property.
Similarly, when parties fear losing something in a business conflict,
they often retreat to a place where they feel safe. By answering the 
four “Can’t Lose Matrix” questions, you are building a fence where safe 
“boundaries” are understood, creating a conversation playground where 
people can openly and creatively collaborate with each other.
This article was originally published online on December 15, 2023.
GM
Greg McKeown is the author of the New York 
Times bestsellers Effortless:Effortless: Make It Easier to Do What Matters 
and Essentialism: The Disciplined Pursuit of Less and the host of 
the popular podcast What’s Essential. He is the Founder of The 
Essentialism Academy.  Greg did his graduate work at Stanford. 
Connect @GregoryMcKeown.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Handle an Emotionally Charged Negotiation
Copyright © 2023 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
6
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
