Digital 
Article
Negotiation Strategies
How to Negotiate…with 
Your Kids
Bring your boardroom skills to the living room. by Mary (Molly) Kern 
and Terri R. Kurtzberg
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

How to Negotiate…with Your 
Kids
Bring your boardroom skills to the living room. by Mary (Molly) Kern 
and Terri R. Kurtzberg
Published on HBR.org  /  May 29, 2020  /  Reprint H05MY1
Westend61/Getty Images
You’re going to negotiate with your kids today, probably multiple 
times. According to one informal survey of 2,000 parents, we negotiate 
with our children an average of six times a day (lasting about eight 
minutes each, or 24 hours a month). Imagine how much these numbers 
have escalated under the circumstances many now find themselves — 
working at home and being with their kids 24/7.
Unfortunately, according to this same survey, parents feel like most of 
these negotiations don’t go well. In our experience as social scientists, 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Negotiate…with Your Kids
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

professors, and with our own kids — as well as through discussions with 
hundreds of parents while researching our book Negotiating at Home: 
Essential Steps for Reaching Agreement with Your Kids — we heard 
story after story of parents who were highly effective at the conference 
table but less so around the dinner table. One successful executive 
explained that he routinely received compliments on his negotiation 
skills at work, but at home he often found himself resorting to “Go ask 
your mother!” when faced with an irrational, short-sighted third-grader. 
When reminded that he often negotiated with irrational, short-sighted 
business clients, he was perplexed.
Stumbling in Negotiations at Home
Why does this happen to people who can execute high-stakes deals, 
who can persuade their colleagues to take new points of view, and who 
can handle conversations about raises and promotions with ease? Three 
challenges of negotiating with our children stand out:
• Emotions. Our kids reach for different tools than our colleagues — 
guilt-trips, meltdowns, playing one parent off the other — in no small 
part because they know they can’t get fired, and neither can we! We 
also let ourselves act and react in more extreme ways than we would in 
the office. Successful negotiators at work know how to stay focused on 
the problem itself and not get sidetracked by interpersonal dynamics.
• Repetition. We engage in the same conversations — bedtime, screen 
time, meal time — again and again, and thus fall into patterns and ruts 
with the ways we respond. At work, negotiations are more contained 
and don’t tend to have as much carry-over from one situation to the 
next.
• Preparation. Because they’re unannounced, because they’re with 
our kids, and because they’re often over everyday things like chores 
and dessert, we don’t tend to plan for these negotiations or prepare 
psychologically. At work, we can often anticipate a negotiation, and so 
do our due diligence and prepare ahead of time.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Negotiate…with Your Kids
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

The problem isn’t that professional negotiation skills don’t apply 
at home — it’s that we’re not using them. In fact, bringing your 
professional expertise home can unlock unrealized value in your 
negotiations with your kids. Working parents especially need to get to 
“win-win” agreements, which are those that protect the main interests 
of both sides. Time and energy are precious, and these agreements 
solve immediate problems, prevent their recurrence, strengthen your 
relationships, and enhance your family time. Here are some strategies 
to reach them.
Know What You’re Really Here to Accomplish
At work, we are generally clear with ourselves about what we want out of 
a situation and can keep our eyes on this overarching goal as a problem 
to be solved. At home, we get mired in specific positions and power 
struggles, which can distract us from being open to more productive 
solutions. Think of the parent who successfully compromised with her 
child about wearing a hat outside. When my daughter didn’t want to 
wear her hat and had that look on her face that told me she was prepared 
to go to the mat over this, I instead proposed a game of Little Red Riding 
Hood. I told her my own scarf would be the hood and that I would get to be 
the star, upon which she begged to wear it.
Instead of either just giving in or engaging in a winner-take-all battle of 
“hat or no hat,” the parent realized that her central interest was keeping 
the child’s head warm. Knowing what’s most important, and what you 
can or cannot live without in an agreement, will help you stay true to 
your “north star” instead of getting stuck on any one idea.
Ask Questions to Fill in the Gaps
Nobody knows your kids better than you do. This is tremendously useful 
for negotiations, but since we can never fully know what’s going on with 
another person in any given moment, this also creates a blind-spot. My 
child and I butted heads over a donut. He wanted the whole donut all at 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Negotiate…with Your Kids
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

once, while I wanted to give him half first, and the second half if he still 
wanted it. It was ugly, and I finally gave in out of exasperation.
If we had a disagreement like this at work, we would likely ask the 
colleague why they cared so much about it, but the parent skipped this 
step. When he offered the donut in two halves, he failed to account 
for the value the child placed on being able to bite into a giant, whole 
donut. Had he asked for his child’s perspective, it might have changed 
the interaction in tone at least, if not in behavior. Offering the chance to 
participate and explain his side would also have helped inspire a sense 
of fair play.
Use the Right Approach at the Right Time
Every executive knows that some battles don’t need to be fought at 
all, some might be strategically postponed, and others just need a 
firm decision from the top-down. Parents similarly would benefit from 
choosing the right strategy for the right moment instead of engaging 
thoughtlessly. The same approach might land very differently as your 
kids grow up (or even based on whether they’re too hungry at that 
moment!).
Decide when to disengage entirely (I knew nothing good was going to 
come of continuing the conversation at that point, so I said we needed to 
table it until later.) and when to spend the time trying to better grasp the 
situation. And while “Because I said so!” is the right answer sometimes, 
if used too often our kids start to tune it (and you) out. Explaining how 
decisions get made can greatly increase compliance and goodwill.
Present Ideas in Ways that Appeal
Effective managers know that it’s not just what you say, but how you say 
it. Busy parents can minimize contentious back-and-forth by crafting 
their statements to pave the way towards acceptance.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Negotiate…with Your Kids
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Go first. Much of your conversation will consist of offers and counter-
offers, so use these to signal your own interests and your insight into 
their interests. State offers early in the negotiation to anchor the rest 
of the conversation by setting expectations and orienting subsequent 
counter-offers. Offering a 10 p.m. curfew usually means my son asks for 
11 in response, and we settle on 10:30. If he got to go first, he’d ask for 
midnight and then we’d end up settling at 11!
Embed choice. Instead of a single offer, two or three choices, framed in 
terms of their priorities, make it easier for your kids to say yes. Choice 
gives a sense of control over both the process and outcome. A parent 
ordering takeout mastered this technique: I announced where we would 
be ordering from instead of opening the floor for debate, but allowed each 
child to choose a dish. This one small change sidestepped an ongoing 
moment of tension in our house.
Highlight reference points. We consider offers not in isolation, but 
as compared to other alternatives. For example, an item on sale seems 
like a great deal in no small part because of the larger (original) price 
tag. This works because as compared to the “it could have been worse” 
option, the proposed option seems more palatable. I told my teen that 
her actions could have resulted in a much more severe punishment, but 
that I would go easy on her and reduce it.
Address fairness. “It’s not fair!” is a common refrain, but kids’ 
assumptions that fairness is based on everything being exactly equal 
can be overly-simplistic and limiting. While splitting the cookie 
between siblings right down the middle is generally a good practice, 
perhaps the four-year-old shouldn’t get as much dessert as the teenager. 
Nor should the two kids split the last piece of cake in half if one prefers 
the icing and the other the cake. In our house, we created a word — 
“unfaired” — to describe that feeling of injustice. When our kids use it, 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Negotiate…with Your Kids
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

we can recognize that we understand why something might feel unfair 
to them, and then analyze why something might be fair even if it wasn’t 
equal.
Don’t do all the talking. Silence can be a powerful tool. It can both help 
you avoid making unilateral concessions (like increasing your offers
prematurely) and gives your child a chance to contribute. My son wanted 
to take the trolley back to the hotel after lunch, but I said I wanted to walk 
back, to take advantage of the nice day. Instead of immediately overruling 
him, I paused. He then suggested that we walk in the opposite direction to 
get in a longer walk and take a longer trolley ride back.
Successful managers know how to prioritize their goals, ask good 
questions, and put offers on the table in ways that inspire creativity 
and generate agreements that both sides want to say yes to. These 
same skills can help working parents (especially with today’s increased 
at-home hours) create positive outcomes with their kids to both help 
navigate difficult moments and model effective problem-solving skills. 
Your kids continue to grow, and so must your skillset. And by practicing 
with your entrenched, passionate, persistent toddlers and teens, your 
kids may even make you better at your job.
This article was originally published online on May 29, 2020.
Mary (Molly) Kern, Ph.D., is an organizational psychologist and 
Associate Professor of Management at Baruch College – City 
University of New York. Her research and teaching focus on 
negotiation processes and team dynamics aimed toward maximizing 
performance, and bounded ethicality to support ethical learners.
Terri R. Kurtzberg, PhD, is a professor of management and global 
business at Rutgers Business School. She is the author of five books 
and her research is frequently quoted in the media. Dr. Kurtzberg is 
the recipient of multiple teaching and research awards.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Negotiate…with Your Kids
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
6
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
