Digital Article / Negotiation Strategies
How to Deflect Difficult Questions in 
an Interview or Negotiation
Research shows there can be costs to telling the truth, refusing to answer, 
and lying. by Brad Bitterly and Maurice Schweitzer
Published on HBR.org  /  November 18, 2019  /  Reprint H05A9O
David Crockett/Getty Images
“Do you have any other offers?”
Whether it’s in interviews or negotiations, we are frequently asked 
questions we would rather not answer. An honest answer might weaken 
our position, compromise our privacy, or disclose sensitive corporate 
information. But how we respond can impact both our economic 
outcome and our relationship with the person asking.
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Prior research has considered three common strategies for answering 
direct, difficult questions. 1) You could answer honestly. We do tend to 
view people who disclose information (especially costly information) as 
trustworthy and likable, but this approach can be economically costly: 
saying “No, I have no other offers” might lead to a lower offer on the 
table. 2) You could decline to answer the question, by saying something 
like “I would rather not answer that.” But this tack can cause relational 
(and often economic) harm, since people tend to dislike and distrust 
individuals who decline to disclose information even more than those 
who reveal negative information about themselves. 3) You could lie, but 
deception is very risky: we dislike, distrust, and often retaliate against 
people who deceive us.
We were curious about another approach that might reduce some of 
these social and economic costs. In our research, we studied deflection
— responding to a direct question with another question that shifts 
the conversation back to the other person. For example, after being 
asked, “Do you have any other offers?” you could deflect with, “Are 
you intending to make me an offer?” We found that deflection enables 
individuals to avoid disclosing costly information in a way that leads 
to better outcomes than simply declining to answer the question and is 
less reputationally risky than deception.
The benefits of deflecting direct questions
In five experimental studies, we had more than 2000 participants 
play the role of art sellers tasked with selling a painting that was 
part of a collection. Participants were paired with art buyers, who 
were actually research assistants following a pre-determined script. 
We informed sellers that they could command a higher price for the 
painting if the buyer had other pieces from the collection. As a result, 
our participants almost always asked the buyers if they had other pieces 
of the collection. In the ensuing negotiation over the price of the art 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Deflect Difficult Questions in an Interview or Negotiation
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

piece, we had buyers respond to this question in different ways and we 
assessed what happened.
In our first two studies (N = 1126), we compared deflection (e.g., in 
response to the seller’s question about whether or not the buyer had 
other pieces, the buyer replied “How much do you want for this piece?”) 
to honest disclosure (e.g., “I did purchase the other pieces in the 
collection.”) and refusing to disclose (e.g., “I’m not prepared to discuss 
my collection right now.”). We discovered that deflection was highly 
effective in redirecting the conversation; 76.9% of sellers answered the 
deflection question (e.g., “How does 10,000 sound?”). We found that 
buyers who honestly disclosed information about their collection were 
liked and trusted the most by participants, but they also paid the 
highest prices. In contrast, refusing to disclose led to better economic 
outcomes (a lower price) for the buyer than an honest disclosure, but 
harmed the extent to which the sellers liked and trusted the buyer. 
Buyers who deflected struck a balance. They achieved lower prices than 
honest buyers, and they were better liked and trusted than buyers who 
declined to disclose.
In our next two studies (N = 480), we compared the economic and 
interpersonal effects of deflection to deception. We used a similar 
experimental paradigm and manipulated deception by having buyers 
respond with a lie: “I do not have any other pieces in the collection.” 
In these studies, lying enabled buyers to obtain better outcomes than 
deflection—but only in the near-term. We had sellers provide initial 
ratings of trust and liking of their counterpart, and then we revealed 
that their buyer did have the other pieces in the collection. We then 
had participants rate their counterpart a second time. The extent to 
which participants liked and trusted their buyer dropped significantly
after learning that they had been deceived, compared to after they had 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Deflect Difficult Questions in an Interview or Negotiation
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

experienced deflection, and participants were significantly less likely to 
want to negotiate with their partner again.
Why does deflection work so well in response to tricky questions? In 
our next study (N = 600), we had participants rate the extent to which 
they felt that their counterpart was trying to (a) hide information, and 
(b) learn information. We found that, compared to declining to disclose 
or deception, deflection made sellers think that their counterpart was 
seeking to learn information rather than trying to hide information. It 
seems that because we generally like people who are curious and open, 
deflection can boost trust and liking compared to declining to disclose 
or deception.
In our negotiation settings, we found deflection to be very effective.
But we suspect that the two-person nature of the exchange in our 
studies may be important. When we are asked a direct question, we 
feel compelled to answer it — even if this causes us to lose track of 
our initial question. In some situations, however, other people may 
be observing the conversation. This might be true during interviews 
or larger group negotiations. Observers may be more likely to spot 
deflection than participants were in our studies, and quite possibly, the 
benefits of deflection may be diminished in larger groups.
How to deflect
Deflection can clearly be a useful tool when negotiating or interviewing. 
When asked a tricky question, it can help you avoid suffering economic 
or social penalties that might come with being honest, declining to 
answer, or lying. However, deflection does not come naturally for many 
people. So here are some suggestions for effectively deflecting direct 
questions: 
Anticipate the difficult, direct questions you are likely to be asked. 
There are times when we are asked questions we don’t want to or 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Deflect Difficult Questions in an Interview or Negotiation
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

cannot or should not answer. For example, in an interview we may be 
asked questions about our relationship/marital status, age, or political 
affiliation. Think about questions you don’t want to answer so that you 
can formulate responses to them.
Develop deflecting questions. The best deflecting questions stick to 
the same subject of the question that was initially posed (this helps to 
maintain the flow of the conversation) and focus on your counterpart 
(people are often keen to talk about themselves). Deflection questions 
that are humorous can also be particularly disarming. For example, 
in response to the question, “When do you plan on having children?” 
which by the way is illegal for employers to ask in the U.S., the deflection
could be: “Do you have any children?” Or a humorous response might 
be: “At least 9 months apart. Is there a different norm at this company?” 
A little humor can pivot the conversation to a different topic and signal 
that you want to create a pleasant interaction.
Practice deflecting questions. Inventing deflection questions on the 
spot can be difficult. By anticipating questions you are likely to 
be asked and preparing different deflection responses, you will be 
well positioned to redirect a conversation. For important discussions, 
consider rehearsing a conversation with a colleague or friend. For 
example, provide a colleague a list of questions you are likely to be 
asked that includes one or two difficult questions you would like to 
avoid answering. Then, without letting your colleague know that you 
plan to use deflection, try deflecting the target question to redirect the 
conversation.
Anticipate responses to your deflection questions. We find that the 
conversational norm to answer a direct question is surprisingly strong. 
This means that you may need to exert effort to avoid answering a direct 
question, but it also means that your conversational partner too is likely 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Deflect Difficult Questions in an Interview or Negotiation
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

to feel compelled to answer your question. If you respond to a direct 
question such as, “What are your outside options?” with “What’s your 
initial offer?” you should recognize that your counterpart will feel the 
psychological tug to answer your question. Consider how you might use 
additional questions or comments to develop and steer the conversation 
from there.
Prepare to defend against deflection. If you are the one keen to gather 
critical information, you should anticipate that deflection is difficult to 
detect — and that you are likely to feel compelled to answer deflection
questions. As you prepare for your negotiation or meeting, prepare a list 
of key questions you plan to ask and star the ones that are particularly 
important. During the meeting, keep notes on the responses you receive 
paying particularly attention to your key questions. In our studies, most 
people not only answer the deflection question, but also never return to 
their original question.
We are often asked direct, difficult questions. Because the compunction 
to answer a direct question is so strong, many people offer responses in 
the moment that they later regret, from revealing costly information to 
telling a lie. By focusing on how to deflect difficult questions, we can 
guide a conversation and protect our interests. The next time that you 
are asked a difficult question, consider posing a new one.
This article was originally published online on November 18, 2019.
BB
Brad Bitterly is a postdoctoral research fellow at the University of 
Michigan’s Ross School of Business.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Deflect Difficult Questions in an Interview or Negotiation
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
6
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Maurice Schweitzer is the Cecilia Yen Koo Professor at the Wharton 
School and coauthor of Friend & Foe. His research interests include 
negotiations, emotions, and deception.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Deflect Difficult Questions in an Interview or Negotiation
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
7
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
