www.hbr.org
 
3-D Negotiation
 
Playing the Whole Game
 
by David A. Lax and James K. Sebenius
 
Savvy negotiators not only 
play their cards well, they 
design the game in their favor 
even before they get to the 
table.
 
Reprint R0311D
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

 
3-D Negotiation
 
by David A. Lax and James K. Sebenius
 
harvard business review • november 2003
page 1
 
COPYRIGHT © 2003 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
 
Savvy negotiators not only play their cards well, they design the game 
in their favor even before they get to the table.
 
What stands between you and the yes you
want? In our analysis of hundreds of negotia-
tions, we’ve uncovered barriers in three com-
plementary dimensions: The first is tactics; the
second is deal design; and the third is setup.
Each dimension is crucial, but many negotia-
tors and much of the negotiation literature fix-
ate on only the first two.
For instance, most negotiation books focus
on how executives can master tactics—interac-
tions at the bargaining table. The common
barriers to yes in this dimension include a lack
of trust between parties, poor communication,
and negotiators’ “hardball” attitudes. So the
books offer useful tips on reading body lan-
guage, adapting your style to the bargaining
situation, listening actively, framing your case
persuasively, deciding on offers and counterof-
fers, managing deadlines, countering dirty
tricks, avoiding cross-cultural gaffes, and so on.
The second dimension, that of deal de-
sign—or negotiators’ ability to draw up a deal
at the table that creates lasting value—also re-
ceives attention. When a deal does not offer
enough value to all sides, or when its structure
won’t allow for success, effective 2-D negotia-
tors work to diagnose underlying sources of
economic and noneconomic value and then
craft agreements that can unlock that value
for the parties. Does some sort of trade be-
tween sides make sense and, if so, on what
terms? Should it be a staged agreement, per-
haps with contingencies and risk-sharing provi-
sions? A deal with a more creative concept and
structure? One that meets ego needs as well as
economic ones?
Beyond the interpersonal and deal design
challenges executives face in 1-D and 2-D nego-
tiations lie the 3-D obstacles—flaws in the ne-
gotiating setup itself. Common problems in
this often-neglected third dimension include
negotiating with the wrong parties or about
the wrong set of issues, involving parties in the
wrong sequence or at the wrong time, as well
as incompatible or unattractive no-deal op-
tions. 3-D negotiators, however, reshape the
scope and sequence of the game itself to
achieve the desired outcome. Acting entrepre-
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

 
3-D Negotiation
 
harvard business review • november 2003
page 2
 
David A. Lax
 
 (lax@negotiate.com) is a
principal of Lax Sebenius, a negotia-
tion-strategy consulting firm in Con-
cord, Massachusetts.  
 
James K. Sebe-
nius
 
 
(jsebenius@hbs.edu) 
is 
the
Gordon Donaldson Professor of Busi-
ness Administration at Harvard Busi-
ness School in Boston and a principal of
Lax Sebenius. They are both members
of the Negotiation Roundtable forum
at Harvard Business School and the au-
thors of 
 
3-D Negotiation: Creating
and Claiming Value for the Long
Term
 
, forthcoming from Harvard Busi-
ness School Press.  
 
neurially, away from the table, they ensure
that the right parties are approached in the
right order to deal with the right issues, by the
right means, at the right time, under the right
set of expectations, and facing the right no-
deal options.
Former U.S. trade representative Charlene
Barshefsky, who has negotiated with hundreds
of companies, governments, and nongovern-
mental organizations to spearhead deals on
goods, services, and intellectual property, char-
acterizes successful 3-D negotiations this way:
“Tactics at the table are only the cleanup
work. Many people mistake tactics for the un-
derlying substance and the relentless efforts
away from the table that are needed to set up
the most promising possible situation once you
face your counterpart. When you know what
you need and you have put a broader strategy
in place, then negotiating tactics will flow.”
 
1
 
3-D Negotiation in Practice
 
Even managers who possess superior interper-
sonal skills in negotiations can fail when the
barriers to agreement fall in the 3-D realm.
During the 1960s, Kennecott Copper’s long-
term, low-royalty contract governing its huge
El Teniente mine in Chile was at high risk of
renegotiation; the political situation in Chile
had changed drastically since the contract was
originally drawn up, rendering the terms of
the deal unstable. Chile had what appeared to
be a very attractive walkaway option—or in
negotiation lingo, a BATNA (best alternative
to negotiated agreement). By unilateral ac-
tion, the Chilean government could radically
change the financial terms of the deal or even
expropriate the mine. Kennecott’s BATNA ap-
peared poor: Submit to new terms or be expro-
priated.
Imagine that Kennecott had adopted a 1-D
strategy focusing primarily on interpersonal
actions at the bargaining table. Using that ap-
proach, Kennecott’s management team would
assess the personalities of the ministers with
whom it would be negotiating. It would try to
be culturally sensitive, and it might choose ele-
gant restaurants in which to meet. Indeed,
Kennecott’s team did take such sensible ac-
tions. But that approach wasn’t promising
enough given the threatening realities of the
situation. Chile’s officials seemed to hold all
the cards: They didn’t need Kennecott to run
the mine; the country had its own experienced
managers and engineers. And Kennecott’s
hands seemed tied: It couldn’t move the cop-
per mine, nor did it have a lock on down-
stream processing or marketing of the valuable
metal, nor any realistic prospect, as in a previ-
ous era, of calling in the U.S. fleet.
Fortunately for Kennecott, its negotiators
adopted a 3-D strategy and set up the impend-
ing talks most favorably. The team took six
steps and changed the playing field altogether.
First, somewhat to the government’s surprise,
Kennecott offered to sell a majority equity in-
terest in the mine to Chile. Second, to sweeten
that offer, the company proposed using the
proceeds from the sale of equity, along with
money from an Export-Import Bank loan, to fi-
nance a large expansion of the mine. Third, it
induced the Chilean government to guarantee
this loan and make the guarantee subject to
New York state law. Fourth, Kennecott insured
as much as possible of its assets under a U.S.
guarantee against expropriation. Fifth, it ar-
ranged for the expanded mine’s output to be
sold under long-term contracts with North
American and European customers. And sixth,
the collection rights to these contracts were
sold to a consortium of European, U.S., and
Japanese financial institutions.
These actions fundamentally changed the
negotiations. A larger mine, with Chile as the
majority owner, meant a larger and more valu-
able pie for the host country: The proposal
would result in more revenue for Chile and
would address the country’s interest in main-
taining at least nominal sovereignty over its
own natural resources.
Moreover, a broad array of customers, gov-
ernments, and creditors now shared Ken-
necott’s concerns about future 
political
changes in Chile and were highly skeptical of
Chile’s capacity to run the mine efficiently
over time. Instead of facing the original negoti-
ation with Kennecott alone, Chile now effec-
tively faced a multiparty negotiation with play-
ers who would have future dealings with that
country—not only in the mining sector but
also in the financial, industrial, legal, and pub-
lic sectors. Chile’s original BATNA—to uncere-
moniously eject Kennecott—was now far less
attractive than it had been at the outset, since
hurting Kennecott put a wider set of Chile’s
present and future interests at risk.
And finally, the guarantees, insurance, and
other contracts improved Kennecott’s BATNA.
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

 
3-D Negotiation
 
harvard business review • november 2003
page 3
 
If an agreement were not reached and Chile
acted to expropriate the operation, Kennecott
would have a host of parties on its side.
Though the mine was ultimately nationalized
some years later, Chile’s worsened alternatives
gave Kennecott a better operating position
and additional years of cash flow compared
with similar companies that did not take such
actions.
This case underscores our central message:
Don’t just skillfully play the negotiating game
you are handed; change its underlying design
for the better. It is unlikely that 1-D tactical or
interpersonal brilliance at the table—whether
in the form of steely gazes, culturally sensitive
remarks, or careful and considered listening to
all parties—could have saved Kennecott from
its fundamentally adverse bargaining position.
Yet the 3-D moves the company made away
from the table changed the negotiation’s setup
(the parties involved, the interests they saw at
stake, their BATNAs) and ultimately created
more value for all involved—much of which
Kennecott claimed for itself.
 
How 3-D Moves Work
 
Successful 3-D negotiators induce target play-
ers to say yes by improving the proposed deal,
enhancing their own BATNAs, and worsening
those of the other parties. 3-D players intend
such moves mainly to 
 
claim
 
 value for them-
selves but also to 
 
create
 
 value for all sides.
 
Claiming Value. 
 
3-D negotiators rely on
several common practices in order to claim
value, including soliciting outside offers or
bringing new players into the game, some-
times to create a formal or informal auction.
After negotiating a string of alliances and ac-
quisitions that vaulted Millennium Pharma-
ceuticals from a small start-up in 1993 to a
multibillion-dollar company less than a de-
cade later, then–chief business officer Steve
Holtzman explained the rationale for adding
parties to the negotiations: “Whenever we feel
there’s a possibility of a deal with someone,
we immediately call six other people. It drives
you nuts, trying to juggle them all. But num-
ber one, it will change the perception on the
other side of the table. And number two, it
will change your self-perception. If you be-
lieve that there are other people who are in-
terested, your bluff is no longer a bluff; it’s
real. It will come across with a whole other
level of conviction.” (For more on Millen-
nium, see “Strategic Deal-making at Millen-
nium Pharmaceuticals,” HBS case no. 9-800-
032.)
While negotiators should generally try to
improve their BATNAs, they should also be
aware that some of the moves they make
might inadvertently worsen their walkaway
options. For instance, several years ago, we
     
The Three Dimensions of Negotiation
Common Barriers
Interpersonal issues,
poor communication,
“hardball”attitudes
Lack of feasible or 
desirable agreements
Parties, issues, BATNAs,
and other elements
don’t support a viable
process or valuable
agreement
Focus
Tactics 
(people and processes) 
Deal design 
(value and substance)
Setup 
(scope and sequence) 
Approach
Act “at the table”to 
improve interpersonal
processes and tactics
Go “back to the drawing
board”to design deals
that unlock value that
lasts
Make moves “away 
from the table”to create 
a more favorable scope
and sequence
Our research shows that negotiations succeed or fail based on the attention executives
pay to three common dimensions of deal making.
1-D
2-D
3-D
Copyright © 2003 Harvard Business School
Publishing Corporation. All rights reserved.
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

 
3-D Negotiation
 
harvard business review • november 2003
page 4
 
worked with a U.S. manufacturing firm on its
joint-venture negotiations in Mexico. The com-
pany had already researched possible cultural
barriers and ranked its three potential partners
according to the competencies it found most
desirable in those companies. After approach-
ing the negotiations in a culturally sensitive
spirit, and in what had seemed a very logical
sequence, the U.S. team had nevertheless
come to an impasse with the most attractive
partner. The team abandoned those talks and
was now deep into the process with the second
most desirable candidate—and again, things
were going badly. Imagine subsequent negoti-
ations with the third, barely acceptable, part-
ner if the second set of talks had also foun-
dered—in an industry where all would quickly
know the results of earlier negotiations.
As each set of negotiations failed, the U.S.
firm’s BATNA—a deal with another Mexican
company or no joint venture at all—became
progressively worse. Fortunately, the U.S. com-
pany opened exploratory discussions with the
third firm in parallel with the second. This
helped the U.S. company to discover which po-
tential partner actually made the most busi-
ness sense, to avoid closing options prema-
turely, and to take advantage of the
competition between the Mexican companies.
The U.S. business should have arranged the
process so that the prospect of a deal with the
most desirable Mexican partner would func-
tion as its BATNA in talks with the second
most desirable partner, and so on. In short,
doing so would have created the equivalent of
a simultaneous four-party negotiation (struc-
tured as one U.S. firm negotiating in parallel
with each of the three Mexican firms) rather
than three sequential two-party negotiations.
This more promising 3-D setup would have
greatly enhanced whatever 1-D cultural insight
and tactical ingenuity the U.S. firm could mus-
ter.
In addition to strengthening their own posi-
tion, 3-D negotiators who add parties and is-
sues to a deal can weaken the other side’s
BATNA. For instance, when Edgar Bronfman,
former CEO of Seagram’s and head of the
World Jewish Congress, first approached Swiss
banks asking them to compensate Holocaust
survivors whose families’ assets had been un-
justly held since World War II, he felt stone-
walled. Swiss banking executives saw no rea-
son to be forthcoming with Bronfman; they
believed they were on strong legal ground be-
cause the restitution issue had been settled
years ago. But after eight months of lobbying
by Bronfman, the World Jewish Congress, and
others, the negotiations were dramatically ex-
panded—to the detriment of the Swiss. The
bankers faced a de facto coalition of interests
that credibly threatened the lucrative Swiss
share of the public finance business in states
such as California and New York. They faced
the divestiture by huge U.S. pension funds of
stock in Swiss banks as well as in all Swiss-
based companies; a delay in the merger be-
tween Swiss Bank and UBS over the “character
fitness” license vital to doing business in New
York; expensive and intrusive lawsuits brought
by some of the most formidable U.S. class-ac-
tion attorneys; and the wider displeasure of
the U.S. government, which had become ac-
tive in brokering a settlement.
Given the bleak BATNA the Swiss bankers
faced, it’s hardly surprising that the parties
reached an agreement, including a commit-
ment from the Swiss bankers to pay $1.25 bil-
lion to survivors. It was, however, an almost
unimaginable outcome at the beginning of the
small, initially private game in which the Swiss
seemed to hold all the cards.
Another way for negotiators to claim value
is to shift the issues under discussion and the
interests at stake. Consider how Microsoft won
the browser war negotiations. In 1996, AOL
was in dire need of a cutting-edge Internet
browser, and both Netscape and Microsoft
were competing for the deal. The technically
superior, market-dominant Netscape Naviga-
tor vied with the buggier Internet Explorer,
which was then struggling for a market foot-
hold but was considered by Bill Gates to be a
strategic priority. A confident, even arrogant,
Netscape pushed for a technically based
“browser-for-dollars” deal. In the book 
 
aol.com,
 
Jean Villanueva, a senior AOL executive, ob-
served, “The deal was Netscape’s to lose. They
were dominant. We needed to get what the
market wanted. Most important, we saw our-
selves as smaller companies fighting the same
foe—Microsoft.”
But when all was said and done, it was Mi-
crosoft that had etched a deal with AOL. The
software giant would provide Explorer to AOL
for free and had promised a series of technical
adaptations in the future. Microsoft had also
agreed that AOL client software would be bun-
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

 
3-D Negotiation
 
harvard business review • november 2003
page 5
 
dled with the new Windows operating system.
Microsoft—a direct competitor to AOL—
would place the AOL icon on the Windows
desktop right next to the icon for its own on-
line service, the Microsoft Network (MSN).
AOL’s position on “the most valuable desktop
real estate in the world” would permit it to
reach an additional 50 million people per year
at effectively no cost, compared with its $40 to
$80 per-customer acquisition cost incurred by
“carpet bombing” the country with AOL disks.
In effect, Bill Gates sacrificed the medium-
term position of MSN to his larger goal of win-
ning the browser war.
How did 3-D moves swing the negotiations
in Microsoft’s favor? Microsoft’s Web browser
was technically inferior to Netscape’s, so the
chances of Microsoft winning on those
grounds were poor, regardless of its negotiat-
ing skills and tactics at the table. Instead,
Microsoft shifted the negotiations from
Netscape’s technical browser-for-dollars deal
toward wider business issues on which it held a
decisive edge. Rather than focus on selling to
the technologists, Microsoft concentrated on
selling to AOL’s businesspeople. As AOL’s lead
negotiator and head of business development,
David Colburn, stated in his deposition to the
Supreme Court in 1998, “The willingness of
Microsoft to bundle AOL in some form with
the Windows operating system was a critically
important competitive factor that was impossi-
ble for Netscape to match.” Instead of trying
to skillfully play a poor hand when dealing
with party X on issues A and B, Microsoft
changed the game toward a more compatible
counterpart Y, emphasizing issues C, D, and E,
on which it was strong.
These examples of 3-D value-claiming
moves conflict with the standard 1-D interper-
sonal approach to negotiation. Actions taken
away from the table—sharply altering parties
and issues, restructuring and resequencing the
process, changing BATNAs—are not primarily
about 1-D interpersonal skills but rather about
enhancing the underlying setup of the negotia-
tion itself.
 
Creating Value. 
 
By adding complementary
parties or issues to the negotiating process, 3-
D negotiators can not only claim value for
themselves but also create more value for all
parties involved. In 
 
Co-opetition,
 
 their influen-
tial book on business strategy, Adam Branden-
burger and Barry Nalebuff explored the con-
cept of the 
 
value net,
 
 or the collection of
players whose potential combination and
agreement can create value. 3-D negotiators
often facilitate in the development of such
value nets. They scan beyond their specific
transactions for compatible players with com-
plementary capabilities or valuations, and
they craft agreements that profitably incorpo-
rate these players.
The world of foreign affairs offers many ex-
amples in which potentially valuable bilateral
deals can be impossible unless a third party
with complementary interests is included. In a
1985 issue of 
 
Negotiation Journal,
 
 University of
Toronto professor and international negotia-
tion specialist Janice G. Stein wrote the follow-
ing about the importance of Henry Kissinger’s
3-D role in a crucial Middle East negotiation:
“The circular structure of payment was essen-
tial to promoting agreement among the par-
ties. Egypt improved the image of the United
States in the Arab world, especially among the
oil-producing states; the United States gave Is-
rael large amounts of military and financial
aid; and Israel supplied Egypt with territory.
Indeed, a bilateral exchange between Egypt
and Israel would not have succeeded since
each did not want what the other could sup-
ply.”
In an example from the business world, the
owners of a niche packaging company with an
innovative technology and a novel product
were deep in price negotiations to sell the
company to one of three potential buyers, all
of them larger packaging operations. Instead
of mainly working with its bankers to make
the case for a higher valuation and to refine its
at-the-table tactics with each packaging indus-
try player, the niche player took a 3-D ap-
proach. Its broader analysis suggested that one
of its major customers, a large consumer goods
firm, might particularly value having exclusive
access to the niche player’s technologies and
packaging products, so it brought the con-
sumer goods firm into the deal. The move un-
covered a completely new source of potential
value—and a much higher potential selling
price. It also increased the pressure on the
larger packaging companies: They would face
more competition and might not be able offer
the same kind of exclusive, customized packag-
ing service to their customers.
The potential elements of a value net are
not always obvious at the start of a negotia-
Microsoft shifted the 
negotiations from 
Netscape’s technical 
browser-for-dollars deal 
toward wider business 
issues on which it held a 
decisive edge.
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

 
3-D Negotiation
 
harvard business review • november 2003
page 6
 
Mapping Backward to Yes
 
What does a sophisticated 3-D strategy look like? Consider the experience of Henry Iverson and his partners, who acquired 
Concord Pulp and Paper (CPP) for $8.5 million in a highly leveraged transaction. (All company names and details have been 
disguised.) After the basic deal was done, they needed additional financing to make profitable improvements at CPP. Federal 
Street Bank (FSB) turned them down flat, even after they had used such 1-D tactics as persuasive appeals and elegant lunches. 
It was time to move into the 3-D realm.
But first, some background. To acquire CPP from its creditors, Iverson and his partners had put up $700,000 in equity and 
obtained $7.8 million in financing from FSB, consisting of a $1.3 million short-term loan against receivables and a $6.5 million 
loan against assets. Soon after, the opportunity arose for CPP to add a recovery boiler, which would increase plant capacity by 
100 tons a day, improve overall quality and margins, and boost yearly net cash flow by $4.1 million. The boiler would cut CPP’s 
emissions in its host town of Concord by 95%. Over a two-year construction period, the boiler project would cost $9 million, $6 
million of which would go to Bathurst and Felson Engineering (BFE) and the rest to smaller contractors.
The FSB loan officer who delivered the bad news cited the bank’s policies: “We will loan against 50% of unencumbered in-
ventory and 80% of receivables. CPP has neither, and its capital structure is already 93% leveraged.” When Iverson pressed, he 
was told that if he had more equity, FSB might consider a short-term construction loan—but only if a credible third party 
would provide guaranteed takeout financing after two years. So Iverson used 3-D negotiating tactics to scan widely and map 
backward from his current predicament to establish the prior agreements (with as-yet uninvolved parties) that would maxi-
mize the chances of an ultimate yes from the bank.
 
1.
 
 Involve UIC. 
 
Iverson approached 
two insurance companies for takeout fi-
nancing. Unified Insurance Company 
(UIC) had the most attractive fee struc-
ture; Worldwide Insurance had higher 
fees and was uninterested. Both flatly 
stated, “CPP is too leveraged.” More-
over, UIC would only lend against the 
cash flow of fully completed projects. 
Iverson coaxed a deal letter from UIC: 
For a commitment fee plus a share of in-
creased profits from the boiler, Unified 
agreed to lend, conditional on the suc-
cessful completion of the project—and 
more equity in CPP’s capital structure.
 
2.
 
 Involve the EDA. 
 
Iverson’s at-
tempts to raise more equity from in-
vestors failed, so he dug further and 
learned that the U.S. Economic Devel-
opment Administration (EDA) could 
make junior (subordinated) loans to 
firms for certified job-creating 
projects; the overall loan limit was 
equal to the number of jobs times 
$50,000. Since the recovery boiler 
project would generate at least 30 new 
full-time jobs, this implied a junior 
loan of up to $1.5 million. However, 
the EDA loan had to be 50% matched 
by a Local Development Administra-
tion (LDA), which did not exist in Con-
cord.
At this point, Iverson took stock of 
the barriers: the engineer wouldn’t 
proceed without money and, in any 
case, wouldn’t guarantee more than 
the boiler itself—the only thing BFE 
would build. The rest of the required 
system would be complex. Local and 
regional contractors were in no posi-
tion to guarantee the overall project. 
FSB wouldn’t do a construction loan 
without guaranteed takeout financing 
and more equity. UIC wouldn’t do per-
manent takeout financing without a 
successful project and more equity. 
The EDA wouldn’t lend without 
matching funds from the LDA and a 
guarantee of a successful, certified, 
job-creating project. And there was no 
LDA to certify the jobs or provide 
matching funds.
 
3.
 
 Involve the Town of Concord.
 
Undaunted, Iverson approached the 
Concord Town Council and proposed 
that it form an LDA, which could raise 
matching funds, to facilitate the recov-
ery boiler project. He argued that con-
struction and operation of the project 
would create new jobs and dramati-
cally cut CPP’s odors and pollution lev-
els. And it would add at least $180,000 
a year in property taxes if the new 
boiler were built. The council received 
these arguments favorably but, before 
committing, wanted assurances that 
the project would actually work.
 
4. 
 
Involve Derano. 
 
In great need 
of some plausible guarantee of project 
success, Iverson approached Derano, a 
large, national (bondable) engineer-
ing, design, and project management 
firm. Derano expressed serious doubts 
about managing an already-designed 
project with BFE and local contractors 
in place. But by offering to pay above 
the normal fee, Iverson got Derano to 
manage the overall project and to give 
a nonrecourse performance “guaran-
tee”—all conditional on CPP’s raising 
project financing.
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

 
3-D Negotiation
 
harvard business review • november 2003
page 7
     
Bathurst and 
Felson 
Engineering  
• funding
Recovery
Boiler
Project
Federal 
Street Bank
• more equity
• guaranteed 
takeout financing
Unified 
Insurance
Company
• more equity
• actual project 
Economic
Development
Administration
• LDA
• certified jobs
• matching funds
Derano 
(national project
management firm)
• funding
5
2
3
8
1
7
4
6
Start
Finish
Concord Pulp
and Paper
starts 
negotiations for
funding here
LDA
Town of Concord 
• “guaranteed”
project
• less pollution
• more jobs
• lower taxes
Copyright © 2003 Harvard
Business School Publishing
Corporation. All rights reserved.
 
5. 
 
Go back to Concord with Der-
ano deal. 
 
Carrying Derano’s letter that 
gave the provisional guarantee, Iver-
son revisited Concord’s Town Council, 
which agreed to create an LDA. The 
LDA would be instructed to issue 
bonds for $500,000, backed by tax rev-
enue increases and presold to wealthy 
citizens, local and regional contrac-
tors, and other area businesses. As a 
government entity, the LDA would 
also formally certify the expected suc-
cessful job-creation impact of the re-
covery-boiler project.
 
6. 
 
Go back to the EDA with the De-
rano letter and the LDA commit-
ments. 
 
Iverson approached the EDA, 
arm-in-arm with the Concord LDA, 
which brought matching fund commit-
ments and its formal job certification 
(along with Derano’s guarantee) of the 
boiler project. With this backing, EDA 
committed to a $1 million junior (sub-
ordinated) loan (plus the $500,000 
matching loan from Concord’s LDA)—
all conditional on Iverson’s obtaining 
construction and long-term financing. 
 
7. 
 
Go back to UIC to modify its
“more equity” provision. 
 
Iverson suc-
cessfully negotiated with Unified In-
surance to modify the “more equity” 
term of its commitment letter to in-
clude junior debt, since the EDA–LDA 
subordinated debt met UIC’s real in-
terest in a greater financial cushion for 
the UIC loan. 
 
8. 
 
Go back to FSB with Derano,
LDA and EDA commitments, and UIC
modification. 
 
Returning to the bank, 
Iverson argued that EDA–LDA loans 
would provide the functional equiva-
lent of FSB’s requirement for more eq-
uity. In making the case to the risk-
averse loan officer, he tactfully noted 
that UIC, a “notoriously demanding 
creditor,” was willing to treat it as such 
to financially cushion UIC’s perma-
nent financing. Surely that would be 
adequate to protect FSB’s brief two-
year exposure. With this condition 
met—and given Derano’s perfor-
mance “guarantee” and the LDA’s cer-
tification—the bank agreed that UIC’s 
commitment letter met its interest in 
guaranteed takeout financing. FSB’s 
new construction-loan commitment 
unlocked the EDA–LDA money, which 
started funds flowing to Derano and 
BFE. And the project was launched.
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

 
3-D Negotiation
 
harvard business review • november 2003
page 8
 
tion. For example, a U.S.–European conserva-
tion group wished to preserve the maximum
amount of rain-forest habitat in a South
American country. From membership contri-
butions and foundation support, the conserva-
tion group had U.S. dollars it could use (after
converting the dollars to local currency at the
official exchange rate) to buy development
rights. The owner of the land and the conser-
vation group negotiated hard and tentatively
agreed on an amount of rain forest to be pro-
tected and a price per hectare based on local
currency. But 3-D thinking ultimately im-
proved the deal for all sides.
The host country was indebted in dollar-de-
nominated bonds, which were trading at a 45%
discount to their face value (given their per-
ceived default risk). The country had to use
scarce dollar-export earnings, needed for many
pressing domestic purposes, to keep its debt-
service obligations current; of course, interest
payments were determined by the face value
of the debt, not the bond discount. These facts
suggested that more value could have been
created by adding two other sets of players to
the initial negotiation between the landowner
and the conservation group.
In this green variant of a debt-for-equity
swap, the conservation group bought country
debt from foreign holders at the prevailing
45% discount. It then brought this debt to the
country’s Central Bank and negotiated its re-
demption for local currency at a premium be-
tween the discounted value of the debt and its
full-dollar face value (up to an 82% premium
over the discounted value). The conservation
group then used this greater quantity of local
currency from the Central Bank to buy more
development rights from the landowner at a
somewhat higher unit price.
This expanded four-party negotiation—se-
quentially involving the conservation group,
international bondholders, the Central Bank,
and the landowner—benefited everyone more
than the best result possible in the initial nego-
tiation between just the landowner and the
conservation group. The bank was able to re-
tire debt and cancel dollar-interest obligations,
which were very costly to the country, using
cheaper (to it) local currency without export-
ing more or diverting scarce export earnings.
The conservation group was able to save more
rain forest at the same dollar cost, and the
landowner got a higher price in a currency it
was better positioned to use.
To find complementary parties and issues,
as the conservation group did, you should ask
questions that focus on relative valuation.
What uninvolved parties might highly value el-
ements of the present negotiation? What out-
side issues might be highly valued if they were
incorporated into the process? Are there any
parties outside the immediate negotiations
that can bear part of the risk of the deal more
cheaply than the current players?
On the other hand, it is sometimes neces-
sary to shrink—or at least stage—the set of in-
volved issues, interests, and parties in order to
create value. For example, rather than enter
into a full multiparty process at the outset, an
industry association that wants to negotiate a
certain set of standards may benefit from first
seeking agreement between a few dominant
players, which would then serve as the basis
for a later deal among the wider group. Or, ne-
gotiations to forge a multi-issue strategic alli-
ance between two firms may be dramatically
simplified by one side which instead proposes
an outright acquisition.
Certainly, the form chosen for a transaction
can dramatically affect the complexity of nego-
tiations and the value to be had. The planned
merger of equals by Bell Atlantic and Nynex
would have required separate negotiations
with regulatory authorities in each of the 13
states served by the companies. To avoid hav-
ing to undergo politically charged negotiations
at 13 different tables, the parties changed the
game by creating a functionally equivalent
structure in which Bell Atlantic was the nomi-
nal acquirer.
Indeed, it can be necessary to change the
process, rather than the substance, of a negoti-
ation. For example, two partners seeking to
terminate their relationship may have diffi-
culty determining exactly who gets what. But
they may instead be able to agree to a special
mechanism like the “Texas shoot-out,” in
which one side names a price at which it
would be either a buyer (of the other’s shares)
or a seller (of its own shares) and the other side
must respond. Often, changing the form of a
negotiation by bringing in a skilled third-party
mediator creates value. For example, two in-
tensive mediation efforts by outside parties
helped to finally thaw the frozen negotiations
between Microsoft and the Justice Depart-
ment. Many fundamentally different variants
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

 
3-D Negotiation
 
harvard business review • november 2003
page 9
 
of mediation, arbitration, and other special
mechanisms exist, but all are options to
change the game itself rather than efforts to
negotiate more effectively by purely interper-
sonal means.
 
Implementing a 3-D Negotiation 
Strategy
 
Sophisticated negotiators act in all three di-
mensions to create and claim value. While 3-D
negotiators should play the existing game
well, as tacticians and deal designers, they
should also act as entrepreneurs, seeking to
create a more favorable target game. They can
do so by scanning widely to identify possible
elements of a more favorable setup; “mapping
backward” from the most promising structure
for the deal to the current setup; and manag-
ing and framing the flow of information to im-
prove their odds of getting to yes.
 
Scan widely. 
 
To act outside the box, one
must first look outside the box. By searching
beyond the immediate deal on the table for el-
ements of a potential value net, 3-D negotia-
tors can retrain their focus on complementary
capabilities and valuations that other players
might add. Useful game-changing questions
include: Who outside the existing deal might
most value an aspect of it? Who might mini-
mize the costs of production, distribution, risk
bearing, and so on? Who might supply a piece
missing from the current process? Which is-
sues promise mutual advantage? What de-
vices might bring such potential value-creat-
ing parties and issues into the deal? And at
what point does complexity or conflict of in-
terest between parties call for shrinking the
scope of the negotiation? Scanning beyond
the current game to claim value normally fo-
cuses on a parallel set of questions: Are there
additional bidders or parties who could favor-
ably alter BATNAs in other ways? Can certain
issues be linked for leverage?
Such scanning should result in a map of all
the actual and potential parties (including
other interested groups within an organiza-
tion, if necessary). You need to assess their ac-
tual and potential interests and BATNAs, as
well as the difficulty and cost of gaining agree-
ment with each party and the value of having
its support. Your map should also identify the
crucial relationships among the parties: who
influences whom, who tends to defer to
whom, who owes what to whom, who would
find it costly to oppose an emerging agree-
ment with key parties on board, and so on.
The founders of new ventures almost al-
ways need to scan widely in order to construct
the most promising sequence of deals that lead
to a self-sustaining company. Consider the situ-
ation WebTV Networks founder Steve Per-
lman faced in the early and mid-1990s. He had
obtained seed funding, developed the technol-
ogy to bring the Web to ordinary television
sets, created a prototype, and hired his core
team. Running desperately low on cash, Per-
lman scanned widely and discovered an array
of potential negotiating partners—ISPs, VCs,
angel investors, industrial partners, consumer-
electronics businesses, content providers, man-
ufacturers, wholesale and retail distribution
channels, foreign partners, and the like. He
needed to engage in 3-D analysis to determine
the right subset of potential partners to create
the most promising deals to build his com-
pany.
 
Map backward and sequence. 
 
It is helpful
to think of the logic of backward mapping as
being similar to the logic of project manage-
ment. In deciding how to undertake a com-
plex project, you start with the end point and
work back to the present to develop a time
line and critical path. In negotiation, how-
ever, the completed “project” should be a set
of value-creating, sustainable agreements
among a supportive coalition of parties.
For instance, when Perlman’s WebTV was
almost out of money, it might have seemed ob-
vious that he should approach venture capital
firms first. However, because VCs were deeply
skeptical of consumer-electronics deals at that
time, Perlman mapped backward from his VC
target. He reasoned that a VC would find
WebTV more appealing if a prominent con-
sumer-electronics company were already on
board, so Perlman embarked on a sequential
strategy. After his first choice, Sony, turned
him down, Perlman kept reasoning backward
from his target. Finally, he was able to get Phil-
lips on board. He then used Phillips to reopen
and forge a complementary deal with Sony.
Next he negotiated new venture money—at a
far higher valuation—since both Sony and
Phillips had signed on. With new money in the
tank, it was fairly straightforward to thread a
path of supporting agreements through manu-
facturers, wholesale and retail distribution
channels, content providers, ISPs, and alliance
While 3-D negotiators 
should play the existing 
game well, as tacticians 
and deal designers, they 
should also act as 
entrepreneurs.
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

 
3-D Negotiation
 
harvard business review • november 2003
page 10
 
partners abroad.
As the WebTV case suggests, a common
problem for a would-be coalition builder is
that approaching the most difficult—and per-
haps most critical—party offers slim chances
for a deal, either at all or on desirable terms.
To improve the odds of getting to yes, figure
out which partners you would ideally like to
have on board when you initiate negotiations
with the target party. As the answer to this
question becomes clear, you have identified
the penultimate stage. Continue mapping
backward until you have found the most
promising sequence of discussions.
Consider the successful sequencing tactics
of Bill Daley, President Clinton’s strategist for
securing congressional approval of the North
American Free Trade Agreement, as reported
in a 1993 
 
New Yorker
 
 article: “News might ar-
rive that a representative who had been lean-
ing toward yes had come out as a no. ‘Weenie,’
[Daley would] say. When he heard the bad
news, he did not take it personally.…He’d take
more calls. ‘Can we find the guy who can de-
liver the guy? We have to call the guy who
calls the guy who calls the guy.’”
Beyond pure sequencing, the 3-D negotiator
can use the scope of the negotiation—how ele-
ments are added, subtracted, combined, or
separated—to influence the chances of bring-
ing each party on board. Issues can be added to
make a deal more attractive (as Microsoft did
with AOL) or a BATNA less attractive (as hap-
pened to the Swiss banks). And by not bringing
on board a party to whom others have antipa-
thy, negotiators can increase the probability of
their success. That’s what James Baker did
when building the first Gulf War coalition; by
omitting Israel from explicit membership in
the group, he was able to attract moderate
Arab states.
 
Manage the information flow. 
 
Some nego-
tiations are best approached by gathering all
affected parties together, fully sharing infor-
mation, and brainstorming a solution to the
shared problem. Frequently, however, vital 3-
D questions involve deciding which stages of
the process should be public or private as well
as how information from one stage should
spill over to or be framed at other stages.
A wry story illustrates the potential of such
choices to set up a linked series of negotia-
tions. A prominent diplomat once decided to
help a charming and capable young man of
very modest background from Eastern Europe.
Approaching the chairman of the state bank,
the statesman indicated that “a gifted and am-
bitious young man, soon to be the son-in-law
of Baron Rothschild,” was seeking a fast-track
position in banking. Shortly thereafter, in a
separate conversation with the baron, whom
he knew to be searching for a suitable match
for his daughter, the statesman enthusiasti-
cally described a “handsome, very capable
young man who was making a stellar ascent at
the state bank.” When later introduced to the
young swain, the dutiful daughter found him
charming, with enviable talents and pros-
pects, and acceptable to her father. When she
said yes, the three-way deal allegedly went
through—to everyone’s ultimate satisfaction.
Setting aside the dubious factual base and
ethics of this negotiation, notice how the diplo-
mat’s 3-D actions set up the most promising
game for his purposes. By separating and se-
quencing the stages of the process, as well as
opportunistically framing his message at each
juncture, the statesman created a situation
that fostered an otherwise most unlikely out-
come. Of course, had the banker, the baron,
the daughter, and the young man been ini-
tially thrown together in a face-to-face meet-
ing, it is doubtful that even the statesman’s
suave 1-D approach could have closed the deal.
Analogously, potential investors should be
wary of the common tactic of separating deals
to close both: for instance, getting investor A
to commit funds based on the commitment of
“savvy investor” B, when B has indeed com-
mitted, but only on the informal (and wrong)
understanding that “reputable investor” A has
unconditionally agreed to do so.
Negotiations to assemble land for a real es-
tate project offer another good example of the
importance of staging the release of informa-
tion. Early knowledge of a developer’s plans
can be quite valuable to landowners in the tar-
get area. Since landowners may use this knowl-
edge to extract maximum price concessions in
later stages of assembly, the need for secrecy
and separation of the individual negotiations is
usually obvious. Indeed, the choice of which
parcel to buy first, second, and so on, may de-
pend on the relative odds that a given pur-
chase will leak the developer’s intentions as
well as whether the parcels already obtained
would permit some version of the project to go
ahead, or whether they would be useless with-
A 3-D player’s ability to 
determine whether a 
related negotiation 
happens before or after 
his own—as well as 
whether the results 
become public—can 
greatly influence the 
outcome.
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

 
3-D Negotiation
 
harvard business review • november 2003
page 11
 
out a later acquisition.
Indeed, a 3-D player’s ability to determine
whether a related negotiation happens before
or after his own—as well as whether the re-
sults become public—can greatly influence the
outcome. For example, according to a 1985 ar-
ticle in 
 
International Studies Quarterly,
 
 while
the United States was in separate talks with Ja-
pan, Hong Kong, and Korea over textile trade
agreements, a Korean negotiator told the U.S.
representatives, “We’ll ask Hong Kong to go
first, then see what they get.” The Koreans ap-
parently regarded Hong Kong officials as
highly skilled negotiators, with better lan-
guage skills for dealing with the Americans. An
observer reports that, “After waiting for Hong
Kong and Japan to go first, Seoul asked for the
features they had secured and then also held
out for a bit more.” In essence, the order cho-
sen by the Americans (as encouraged by the
Koreans) revealed information about the U.S.
approach that was of great value to the Kore-
ans. One wonders whether the Americans
should have rethought the sequence and
started with Seoul.
 
• • •
 
That negotiators should be good listeners, per-
suaders, and tacticians is a given. But beyond
perfecting these 1-D skills, negotiators should
also be innovative 2-D deal designers who
have mastered the principles for crafting
value-creating agreements. And the third,
often-missing dimension—actions taken to
change the scope and sequence of the game
itself—can be crucial to a negotiation that
would otherwise be completely out of tactical
reach.
Negotiators must take care to keep sophisti-
cated 3-D moves from blurring into the unethi-
cal and manipulative. Yet without 3-D actions,
coalitions vital to many worthy initiatives
could never have been built.
To create and claim value for the long term,
great negotiators should be at home in all
three dimensions. To do anything less is to risk
playing a one- or two-dimensional strategy in a
three-dimensional world.
 
1. A complete set of sources for this article can be found at
www.people.hbs.edu/jsebenius/hbr/3-DNegotiation.pdf.
 
Reprint R0311D; 
 
Harvard Business Review
 
 
OnPoint 5372
 
To order, see the next page
or call 800-988-0886 or 617-783-7500
or go to www.hbr.org
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

 
Further Reading
 
To Order
 
For reprints, 
 
Harvard Business Review
 
 
OnPoint orders, and subscriptions 
to 
 
Harvard Business Review:
 
Call 800-988-0886 or 617-783-7500.
Go to www.hbr.org
For customized and quantity orders 
of reprints and 
 
Harvard Business 
Review
 
 OnPoint products:
Call Frank Tamoshunas at 
617-783-7626, 
or e-mail him at 
ftamoshunas@hbsp.harvard.edu
 
Harvard Business Review
 
 OnPoint 
articles enhance the full-text article 
with a summary of its key points and 
a selection of its company examples 
to help you quickly absorb and apply 
the concepts. 
 
Harvard Business 
Review
 
 OnPoint collections include 
three OnPoint articles and an 
overview comparing the various 
perspectives on a specific topic.
 
page 12
 
3-D Negotiation
 
 is also part of the 
 
Harvard 
Business Review
 
 OnPoint collection 
 
Masterful 
Negotiating
 
, Product no. 5410, which includes 
these additional articles:
 
Six Habits of Merely Effective Negotiators
 
James K. Sebenius
 
Harvard Business Review
 
March 2002
Product no. 9411
 
Negotiating the Spirit of the Deal
 
Ron S. Fortgang, David A. Lax, and 
James K. Sebenius
 
Harvard Business Review
 
February 2003
Product no. 3051
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
