HBR.ORG
DECEMBER 2015 
REPRINT R1512D
SPOTLIGHT ON THE SOFTER SIDE OF NEGOTIATION
Control the Negotiation 
Before It Begins
Focus on four preliminary factors that can shape the outcome.  
by Deepak Malhotra
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

ARTWORK Jack Sutherland, Ancient Sun  
Acrylic and oil on linen, courtesy of saatchiart.com
SPOTLIGHT
2 Harvard Business Review December 2015
SPOTLIGHT ON THE SOFTER SIDE OF NEGOTIATION
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Deepak Malhotra is the 
Eli Goldston Professor of 
Business Administration 
at Harvard Business 
School and the author 
of Negotiating the 
Impossible (Berrett-Koehler, 
forthcoming in 2016), from 
which portions of this 
article are drawn.
Control the  
Negotiation  
Before It Begins
Focus on four preliminary factors that can shape the outcome.  
by Deepak Malhotra
C
ountless books and articles offer advice that 
can help deal makers avoid missteps at the 
bargaining table. But some of the costliest 
mistakes take place before negotiators even sit down 
to discuss the substance of the deal. That’s because 
people fall prey to a seemingly reasonable—but 
ultimately faulty—assumption about deal making. 
Negotiators often take it for granted that if they 
bring a lot of value to the table and have sufficient 
leverage, they’ll be able to strike a great deal. While 
those things are certainly important, many other 
factors influence where each party ends up. 
December 2015 Harvard Business Review 3
FOR ARTICLE REPRINTS CALL 800-988-0886 OR 617-783-7500, OR VISIT HBR.ORG
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

In this article I draw on my experience advising 
scores of companies on deals worth millions or bil-
lions of dollars to present four factors that can have 
a tremendous impact on negotiation outcomes. In 
each case, I provide guidance on what negotiators 
should do before either side starts making offers  
or counteroffers. 
1
Negotiate Process Before Substance 
A couple of years ago, two cofounders of a tech 
venture walked into a meeting with the CEO of a 
Fortune 100 company who had agreed to invest 
$10 million with them. A week earlier, the parties 
had hammered out the investment amount and val-
uation, so the meeting was supposed to be celebra-
tory more than anything else. When the cofounders 
entered the room, they were surprised to see a team 
of lawyers and bankers. The CEO was also there, 
but it soon became clear that he was not going to  
actively participate. 
As soon as the cofounders sat down, the bankers 
on the other side started to renegotiate the deal. The 
$10 million investment was still on the table, but now 
they demanded a much lower valuation; in other 
words, the cofounders would have to give up signifi-
cantly more equity. Their attempts to explain that an 
agreement had already been reached were to no avail. 
What was going on? Had the cofounders misun-
derstood the level of commitment in the previous 
meeting? Had they overlooked steps involved in fi-
nalizing the deal? Had the CEO intended to renege all 
along—or had his team convinced him that the deal 
could be sweetened? 
Upset and confused, the cofounders quickly as-
sessed their options. Accepting the new deal would 
hurt financially (and psychologically), but they’d get 
the $10 million in needed funds. On the other hand, 
doing so would significantly undervalue what they 
brought to the table. They decided to walk out with-
out a deal. Before they left, they emphasized their 
strong desire to do a deal on the initial terms and 
explained that this was a matter of principle as well 
as economics. Within hours, they were on a plane, 
not knowing what would happen. A few days later, 
the CEO called and accepted the original deal.
The gutsy move worked out for the cofounders, 
but it would have been better not to let things go 
wrong in the first place. Their mistake was a com-
mon one: focusing too much on the substance of the 
deal and not enough on the process. Substance is the 
terms that make up the final agreement. Process is 
how you will get from where you are today to that 
agreement. My advice to deal makers: Negotiate pro-
cess before substance.
Consider another scenario. You’ve been negotiat-
ing with someone for months. You have a few final 
concessions that you’ve been holding back—they’re 
costly but worth making if it will close the deal. With 
the finish line in sight, you make the concessions, 
and the other side responds: “This is great. I appreci-
ate your flexibility on these issues. Let me share this 
with my boss to see what she thinks.” Unfortunately 
for you, you had no idea your counterpart even had 
a boss—you thought he was the final decision maker. 
The negotiations are clearly not over, and you have 
nothing left to give.
The more clarity and commitment you have re-
garding the process, the less likely you are to make 
mistakes on substance. Negotiating process entails 
discussing and influencing a range of factors that 
will affect the outcome of the deal. Ask the other 
party: How much time does your company need to 
close the deal? Who must be on board? What fac-
tors might slow down or speed up the process? Are 
there key milestones or dates we should be aware 
of? Remember to find out simple things such as, 
Who will be in the meeting tomorrow? What will the 
agenda be? Since we are not going to discuss the is-
sues of importance to us in the next meeting, when 
will we address them? 
Of course, you can’t always get clear answers to 
every question at the outset—and sometimes it is 
Tell your counterparts what to expect in the negotiation 
process. This allows you to shape how they’ll  
interpret a negative event should one occur and 
to ensure that they don’t overweight its significance. 
SPOTLIGHT ON THE SOFTER SIDE OF NEGOTIATION
4 Harvard Business Review December 2015
4 Harvard Business Review
COPYRIGHT © 2015 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

premature to ask certain questions. But you should 
seek to clarify and reach agreement on as many pro-
cess elements as possible—and as early as is appro-
priate—to avoid stumbling on substance later. 
2
Normalize the Process
A businessman who owns multiple manufac-
turing facilities in Asia once told me that he no longer 
does business with companies from the West unless 
their top managers are willing to first fly into his city 
to meet with him. My initial thoughts were: Is this 
about ego? Is it about building relationships? Is it a 
cultural norm or ritual of some sort? Actually, none 
of those had anything to do with his precondition to 
signing a contract.
Here’s how he explained it to me: “Until they 
have flown into my city and then driven to our 
manufacturing plants—which are located 20 kilo-
meters from the airport but take almost three hours 
to reach—until they have experienced that, they 
simply don’t understand how things work around 
here. And if they don’t understand, we run into seri-
ous problems. Because the first time there is a delay 
or disruption, or if we need to renegotiate some-
thing, they will immediately assume we are either 
incompetent or stealing from them. Once they’ve 
seen how things actually work, we can have a more 
productive relationship.” 
Unless business partners understand what is 
“normal” in a given context or culture, they are likely 
to misunderstand or overreact to adverse events. 
The same is true in negotiations of all kinds: It is im-
portant to normalize the process. If you’ve ever been 
involved in an ugly conflict that went into mediation, 
you may have seen this in action. When a good medi-
ator sits down with parties who are in a bitter dispute, 
she might say something like, “You think you hate 
each other today? I can assure you, about three days 
into this process, you’re going to hate each other 
even more. And when that happens, I want you to 
remember something: That’s normal.”
If the mediator does not give this warning, the 
parties are much more likely to abandon the process 
when emotions heighten and things seem to be fall-
ing apart. But if she explains at the outset that it’s 
normal for things to get worse before they get bet-
ter, the parties are more likely to keep at it. By nor-
malizing the process, she effectively manages their 
expectations.
The same principle applies to any negotiation 
where there’s a risk that things will not go perfectly 
smoothly. If you anticipate delays or disruptions 
on your side, tell your counterparts. This allows 
you to shape how they will interpret a negative 
event should one occur and to ensure that they do 
not overweight its significance. You’ll have a much 
harder time trying to influence their perceptions or 
win back their trust after something goes wrong 
that they did not expect.
Normalizing the process entails discussing, in 
advance, any factors that might cause the other side 
to question your intentions or ability or to doubt the 
likelihood of a successful outcome. You might ex-
plain typical barriers that need to be overcome, mo-
ments during the process when it’s common for par-
ties to feel anxious or pessimistic, events that might 
delay progress, and the difference between disrup-
tions that are commonplace and easy to resolve and 
ones that are more serious.
Encourage the other side to do the same for 
you. People often hesitate to discuss “what might 
go wrong,” because they’re focused on presenting 
themselves and the merits of the deal in the best pos-
sible light. This is especially true in certain cultures 
and in contexts where competition is fierce. Your 
counterpart might be thinking, “Why should I talk 
Idea in Brief
THE PROBLEM
Some of the costliest mistakes in 
negotiations take place before anyone  
sits down at the bargaining table. That’s 
because deal makers tend to focus too 
much on substance—offers, counteroffers, 
concessions—and not enough on process.
THE SOLUTION
Four strategies can help set the stage for a 
successful negotiation. 
• Negotiators need to address matters of 
process at the outset.
• They must set realistic expectations.
• They need to clearly identify all players that 
will influence or be influenced by the deal. 
• And they must set the psychological frame 
through which the deal will be viewed. 
December 2015 Harvard Business Review 5
FOR ARTICLE REPRINTS CALL 800-988-0886 OR 617-783-7500, OR VISIT HBR.ORG
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

about problems if my rivals are pretending things 
will be great?”
That’s understandable. If other parties think 
that mentioning a potential disruption could cost 
them the business, or that you’ll use it as a lever 
to extract greater concessions, they’re unlikely to 
be truthful. To encourage people to be open about 
problems, make it safe for them. Explain that you 
are experienced enough to know that every deal and 
relationship is likely to encounter difficulties and 
disruptions, and that you want to learn more about 
the specific risk factors that might play a role in this 
case. And if you can signal (or commit to) having no 
intention of holding those factors against them, you 
have a better chance of reaching an understanding 
that works for both sides.
3
Map Out the Negotiation Space
Some years ago, a client of mine was preparing 
to sell his stake in a company that was jointly owned 
by four entities. The owners had been squabbling for 
many years; it was clear that the asset would need 
to be consolidated under one party (or perhaps two 
who could get along). It was also clear that no one 
wanted to sell. However, there was little choice in 
the matter, because one of the owners—Company 
X—was a much larger company with the power and 
the clout to push people out. It announced that it 
would buy out the other three. 
My client wanted to wait until Company X had 
bought out the other two owners before negotiating 
the sale of his shares. He figured that by being “the 
last piece of the puzzle,” he would be able to hold out 
for more money.
When we met to discuss his strategy, I asked him 
to step back and “map out the negotiation space.” 
This consists of every party that can affect the ne-
gotiation, along with any party that will be affected 
by the negotiation. In my experience, a strategy 
that makes perfect sense when you’re thinking 
bilaterally—that is, about the relationship between 
any two parties in the negotiation—can suddenly 
become ineffective or even disastrous when you 
take a multilateral perspective. I encouraged my 
client to evaluate the interests, constraints, alter-
natives, and perspective of all the relevant parties. 
One of the things we looked at was how much eq-
uity each party had and how much of the board each 
one controlled:
COMPANY B
1/6 of shares
0 board seats
CLIENT
1/6 of shares
1 board seats
COMPANY A
1/3 of shares
2 board seats
THE NEGOTIATION SPACE
COMPANY X
1/3 of shares
2 board seats
We then focused on the interests of each com-
pany: What exactly are their interests in this deal? 
How would you rank their priorities? The four par-
ties had known one another a long time, and my cli-
ent did not have any trouble identifying what mat-
tered most to each. Company X, for example, was 
concerned about three things, and its priorities were 
as follows: (1) Reputation: It did not want ties with 
any organization that could hurt its reputation. (2) 
Control: It wanted ownership only in businesses 
where it had a majority of board seats, and (3) Money: 
It would want to pay as little as possible, but this was 
not as big a concern as reputation and control. 
After delving into the perspectives of all parties, 
we unearthed one more important bit of informa-
tion: Company A was the least interested in selling 
and was already putting up a fight that could drag 
things out. 
You put yourself at a disadvantage when you focus 
narrowly on the party on the other side of the table.  
You have to assess the perspective of all the parties  
that can influence or are influenced by the deal.
SPOTLIGHT ON THE SOFTER SIDE OF NEGOTIATION
6 Harvard Business Review December 2015
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

When we put all these details together, it became 
clear that the “last piece of the puzzle” strategy 
would be unwise. Why?
For Company X, control was a higher priority 
than money. To get control, it needed to buy either 
my client or Company A—as soon as it made either 
purchase, it would control more than 50% of the 
board seats and hence the company (for most deci-
sions). Therefore, if my client were the last to sell, he 
would be negotiating with Company X after it had 
control. At that time, my client would be able to get 
paid only for his 1/6 share of the firm’s equity. But 
if he were to sell first, at a time when Company A 
was refusing to sell and was making things difficult 
for Company X, he could monetize two assets: his 
shares and his board seat. In other words, the last 
party to negotiate would have the least leverage and 
limited opportunities to monetize its assets.
In the real world, you’ll never have as complete a 
picture as you’d like, but you put yourself at further 
disadvantage if you focus too narrowly on the party 
on the other side of the table. You have to assess the 
perspective of all the parties that can influence or are 
influenced by the deal: Who has the ability to influ-
ence the person on the other side of the table? How 
might the strategy or actions of other parties change 
your alternatives, for better or worse? How does the 
deal affect the interests of those who are not at the 
table? How will this negotiation affect your leverage 
with future negotiation partners? If multiple par-
ties are involved in the deal, does it make sense to 
negotiate with them simultaneously or in sequence, 
together or separately? 
Your analysis might suggest a change of strat-
egy—that you should negotiate with a different 
party first, delay the deal or speed it up, bring others 
into the room, expand or contract the scope of the 
deal, and so on. 
4
Control the Frame
The outcome of a negotiation depends a great 
deal on each side’s leverage—the better your outside 
options are and the more ways you have to reward 
or coerce the other side, the more likely you are to 
achieve your objectives. But the psychology of the 
deal can be just as important. 
In my experience, the frame, or psychological 
lens, through which the parties view the negotiation 
has a significant effect on where they end up. Are the 
parties treating the interaction as a problem-solving 
exercise or as a battle to be won? Are they looking at 
it as a meeting of equals, or do they perceive a dif-
ference in status? Are they focused on the long term 
or the short term? Are concessions expected, or are 
they seen as signs of weakness? 
Effective negotiators will seek to control or ad-
just the frame early in the process—ideally, before 
the substance of the deal is even discussed. Here are 
three elements of framing that negotiators would be 
wise to consider.
Value versus price. I’ve worked with many 
technology companies whose innovative products 
provide tremendous value for customers but are 
priced significantly higher than what their competi-
tors are charging—or what customers are paying for 
their legacy systems. While the high price is justified 
by the value proposition, salespeople often face im-
mediate resistance when a potential customer learns 
that the cost will be five or 10 times the amount he 
is currently paying. Too often, the salesperson will 
hear something like: “You are charging five times 
what others charge. No one pays that much for this 
kind of thing!”
One of the most common mistakes salespeople 
make in those situations—without even realizing 
it—is to apologize for having a high price. They do 
this when they say “I understand it’s pricey, but…” or 
when they hastily signal a willingness to adjust the 
price. My advice: Always justify your offer, but never 
apologize for it. When you apologize, you signal that 
even you don’t think the price is appropriate, and 
you give the other side license to haggle. The entire 
frame of the negotiation becomes about price, when 
what you really want to discuss is value. 
A better response would be, “What you seem to 
be asking is, How is it that despite a higher price, we 
still have a long and growing list of customers? We 
both know that no one will pay more for something 
than it’s worth, so let’s discuss the value we bring so 
that you can decide what’s best for you.” 
The psychological lens 
through which parties view a 
negotiation has a significant 
effect on where they end up.
December 2015 Harvard Business Review 7
FOR ARTICLE REPRINTS CALL 800-988-0886 OR 617-783-7500, OR VISIT HBR.ORG
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

In negotiations of all kinds, the sooner you can 
shift the discussion away from the cost to your 
counterpart and focus on the value you bring to the 
table, the more likely it is that you will be able to 
monetize that value.
Your alternatives versus theirs. Research 
and experience suggest that people who walk into 
a negotiation consumed by the question “what will 
happen to me if there is no deal?” get worse out-
comes than those who focus on what would hap-
pen to the other side if there’s no deal. When you 
are overly concerned with your own alternatives, 
and especially when your outside options are weak, 
you think in terms of “what will it take (at a mini-
mum) to get them to say yes?” When you make the 
negotiation about what happens to them if there 
is no deal, you shift the frame to the unique value 
you offer, and it becomes easier to justify why you  
deserve a good deal. 
Equality versus dominance. Not so long ago I 
was consulting on a strategic deal in which our side 
was a small, early-stage company and the other was 
a large multinational. One of the most important 
things we did throughout the process—and espe-
cially at the outset—was make sure the difference in 
company size did not frame the negotiation. I told 
our team, “These folks negotiate with two kinds of 
companies—those they consider their equals and 
those they think should feel lucky just to be at the 
table with them. And they treat the two kinds very 
differently, regardless of what they bring to the ta-
ble.” Over the years, I’ve seen many large organiza-
tions impose demands on their perceived inferiors 
that they’d never require from those they considered 
equals. In this negotiation, I wanted to make sure our 
counterpart treated us like equals. 
To keep the dominance frame from taking hold, 
we started shaping expectations and perceptions at 
the very beginning, before we even considered the 
economics of the deal. For example, any time our 
counterpart made a procedural demand—however 
small—that we felt they would not have made of 
an equal, we respectfully pushed back on it. Any 
time they included a provision in the term sheet 
that seemed one-sided, even if it would not have 
been a costly concession, we redrafted it to be sym-
metrical. And throughout the negotiation, we made 
sure they understood that although our firm was 
much smaller, we were equals in this negotiation 
because of the tremendous value we offered. While 
I am not an advocate of nitpicking on minor issues, 
in this case we did so intentionally to help set the 
right frame. 
Negotiators can shape the frame in countless 
other ways and on many other dimensions. At the 
very least, you want to ensure that the psychological 
lens that takes hold respects the value you bring to 
the table.
IN THE ART OF WAR, Sun Tzu posits that every war is 
won or lost before it even begins. There is truth to 
this sentiment in most strategic interactions. While 
it would be unwise for negotiators to minimize the 
importance of carefully managing the substance of a 
deal, they should make every effort to avoid the mis-
takes that can occur before anyone has even formu-
lated an offer. By paying attention to the four factors 
discussed here, you increase your chances of creating 
more-productive interactions and achieving more-
profitable outcomes. 
HBR Reprint R1512D
“Sorry—what we really want is a beginner with experience.”
ROLLI
SPOTLIGHT ON THE SOFTER SIDE OF NEGOTIATION
8 Harvard Business Review December 2015
FOR ARTICLE REPRINTS CALL 800-988-0886 OR 617-783-7500, OR VISIT HBR.ORG
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
