REPRINT R1806G
PUBLISHED IN HBR
NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2018
ARTICLE
SALES
How to Sell  
New Products
Focus on learning, not performance 
by Thomas Steenburgh and Michael Ahearne
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Illustrations by MARCEL CEUPPENS
How  
to Sell 
New  
Products
Thomas Steenburgh
Professor, Darden School  
of Business
Michael Ahearne
Professor, Bauer 
College of Business
Focus on learning,  
not performance.
Sales
2    
Harvard Business Review
November–December 2018
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

FOR ARTICLE REPRINTS CALL 800-988-0886 OR 617-783-7500, OR VISIT HBR.ORG
Harvard Business Review 
November–December 2018    3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

IDEA IN BRIEF
THE PROBLEM
Instead of training 
salespeople to 
understand and 
overcome the 
obstacles inherent 
in selling completely 
new products, 
most companies 
overrely on product 
demonstrations. Thus 
sales teams often 
struggle to close deals.
THE RESEARCH
Studies show that 
customers are often 
enthusiastic about 
new products early in 
the selling cycle but 
become resistant later. 
Studies also show that 
salespeople who take 
the long view and have 
a learning mindset 
are better prepared to 
handle the frustrations 
inherent in the longer 
process.
THE SOLUTION
Train salespeople 
on process, not a 
product’s bells and 
whistles. Create a 
psychological profile 
of the ideal buyer. 
Assess salespeople 
for resilience and grit. 
Use strategic account 
management.
WHEN WE TALK WITH COMPANIES about the biggest 
challenges they face in growing revenues, we hear a  
consistent complaint: Senior leaders have great confidence  
in their ability to develop innovations but not in their 
ability to commercialize them. Our research suggests that 
this gap results from a lack of formal processes and  
effective talent-management strategies. It’s a big problem, 
because it limits the return companies reap from their R&D 
spending. To put it simply, companies that have invested 
millions to dream up new-to-the-world innovations need 
to become more adept at selling them to customers.
Sales
COPYRIGHT © 2018 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
4    
Harvard Business Review
November–December 2018
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

To understand why that’s so difficult, we combed the 
academic literature, conducted numerous one-on-one  
interviews with senior sales leaders, and led several studies 
of our own. We found that successful companies recognize 
that the sales process for new products requires different 
allocations of time and must overcome different objections 
and barriers by comparison with the traditional approach. 
We also found that people who excel at selling new products 
have traits and behaviors different from those of people who 
successfully sell existing product lines—and that the best 
companies develop organizations and cultures to support 
salespeople in rising to the challenge.
A New Sales Process
To better understand what makes the sales process for new 
products different, we surveyed 500 salespeople at B2B 
companies across a wide variety of industries, from technol-
ogy to financial services to industrial products. We wanted 
to understand how they spend their time during the process 
and how the challenges they face vary as it unfolds.
Demands on time. We found that selling new products 
requires greater intensity and consumes much more atten-
tion. On average, salespeople spend 35% more time meeting 
with customers throughout the sales cycle than they do 
when selling established goods and services. Since much of 
that time is spent educating customers on how the product 
will change their current business practices, these meetings 
are typically conducted in person, with 32% more time  
spent in face-to-face meetings. And because committing to  
a completely new product requires broader consensus  
within a targeted company, salespeople spend 30% more 
time meeting with customers’ cross-functional teams.  
Given that time is a salesperson’s most precious resource, 
that’s a costly investment.
Barriers to closing. We asked people to report when they 
met resistance and what their biggest challenges were in each 
of the six stages common to most sales processes: (1) sales 
inquiry, when the initial call is made; (2) needs recognition, 
when the salesperson helps the customer better understand 
his or her needs; (3) evaluation, when the customer begins to 
consider various products; (4) solution development, when 
the customer sits down with a limited set of suppliers and 
works out potential solutions; (5) decision, when the customer 
decides whether or not to buy; and (6) after-sale maintenance, 
which takes place when the product is being used.
One important finding is that resistance to the sale 
typically occurs later in the process for new innovations than 
for established products. That’s because customers are often 
curious about new products, so more of them will say yes to 
an initial meeting. One buyer who rarely accepts appoint-
ments with sales reps commented, “I will always listen if 
someone brings me a new idea. I want to make sure we are 
staying current with the best of what is being done in our 
industry.” But as the process continues, customers become 
more hesitant to abandon the status quo.
The challenges faced in the sales process change over time. 
In the first two stages, the biggest barrier is that customers 
think they have only limited information about the product 
because the salesperson is not revealing something import-
ant about it. Similarly, in the next stage, evaluation, they 
often worry that they still don’t fully understand the product.
A big shift occurs in the solution-development stage. 
At this point customers turn their attention to how their 
business practices would change if they decided to adopt the 
product. The two biggest issues are: Customers don’t like 
open-ended situations, which create uncertainty and raise 
doubt, and they worry that their way of doing business will 
get disrupted. Also, the buying unit typically expands at this 
point, and some of those just joining the process wonder, 
What will happen to me? Similar concerns are raised in the 
decision stage, as customers continue to focus on risk and 
how people in the organization will be affected, worry that 
they will regret a decision to buy, and wonder whether they 
can accurately predict their switching costs.
From the sales organization’s perspective, this pattern 
is problematic and difficult to overcome. Because people 
with new products to sell can book lots of initial meetings, 
they feel a sense of accomplishment: They are getting in 
front of customers and creating relationships with prospects 
who previously might not have taken their calls. The initial 
customer enthusiasm is seductive and persuades the sales-
person that his or her time is being put to good use. But as the 
process unfolds, it becomes clear that many of those  
curiosity-driven meetings were never real opportunities, 
leaving the salespeople with little to show for their efforts.
On average, salespeople who sell new products spend  
32% more time meeting customers face-to-face than do other reps.
FOR ARTICLE REPRINTS CALL 800-988-0886 OR 617-783-7500, OR VISIT HBR.ORG
Harvard Business Review 
November–December 2018    5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

What typically passes for training when a product  
is launched is merely a product showcase in disguise.
Sales
6    
Harvard Business Review
November–December 2018
the characteristics of just over 2,500 salespeople from five 
leading companies in industries including digital media, 
pharmaceuticals, and industrial products and services.
They take the long view. Our first observation: The most 
successful salespeople manage their time more deliberately 
than other salespeople do. On average, they divert their 
attention from existing products and services and use less 
time on administrative work in order to spend 4.5 more 
hours a week selling innovations. They invest more time up 
front identifying good prospects, ruthlessly targeting a few 
customers who are likely to adopt rather than spreading their 
attention over many accounts. We also found that a focus 
on long-term outcomes with customers is closely associated 
with success. One customer described a favorite rep this way: 
“His philosophy was that if he could help us do better, then 
we would ultimately spend more money with his company, 
and in the long run we would all do well.”
They have different concerns. Successful salespeople 
perceive barriers very different from those that others see. 
They are concerned about people and process issues at the 
buying organization and about whether the sale will stall if 
the buyer lacks the evaluation criteria to make a purchase. 
They worry that the customer will see the switching costs 
as being too high, or that too many people will be heavily 
invested in the status quo. In contrast, other salespeople 
focus on their product knowledge, worrying that they lack 
descriptive information or that the information they’ve 
received is unclear.
They exhibit more resolve. Although grit matters in most 
sales, it is even more important when selling new products. 
Setbacks often occur late in the process, causing salespeople 
to feel that the rug has been pulled out from under them. As 
one senior sales leader told us, “Salespeople will never turn 
down the opportunity to sell new products. They view them 
as another arrow in their quiver and immediately see them as a 
key to their success. But whether they put sustained effort into 
selling them is another matter.” Those with a long-term orien-
tation focus on the future payoff and develop coping strategies 
to deal with the obstacles they encounter along the way.
They have a learning mindset. Goal orientation also 
plays a role in success at selling new products. Some 
salespeople have a learning orientation—a desire to improve 
their abilities and a need to master difficult tasks. These 
The training needed. In general, organizations don’t do 
enough to help salespeople navigate this complex process. 
Our research suggests that what usually passes for training 
when a product is launched is merely a product showcase in 
disguise; the main challenges that will arise during the sales 
cycle aren’t addressed. At the launch meeting, product devel-
opment teams typically devote too much attention to the 
product’s bells and whistles, believing that their primary goal 
is to get the salespeople excited enough about the innovation 
to take it to all their customers. Early in the cycle, not only 
must the salesperson provide the right product information, 
but customers must feel they have the right information. That 
involves establishing trust and demonstrating a deep under-
standing of the customer’s challenges. Later in the cycle, 
the salesperson must help the customer understand, assess, 
and manage the risks and the people issues associated with 
change. Too few companies help salespeople learn to do this.
Sales teams would be better off spending their time devel-
oping a psychological profile of the ideal customer. What 
traits suggest that a prospect might be willing to adopt a new 
way of doing business? What behavioral clues signal that he 
or she is serious about making a purchase rather than simply 
learning about a new technology? Does the prospect’s organi-
zational culture support learning and change? For prospects 
who best fit the profile, the sales team should map out all the 
steps that will need to be taken—and all the people who will 
need to be met. This exercise is creative in nature, because 
the goal is to envision what should be new and different in 
the sales process. The team should ask, “Will the buyer need 
to create new evaluation criteria before a sale can be made? 
Which groups in the buying organization stand to lose power, 
and how might they be mollified? Do we know everyone who 
will be affected by the change? If not, how can we develop 
the network we need?”
Although the sales team won’t have all the information 
required to get this perfectly right the first time around, 
working through the exercise will help avoid major stumbling 
blocks and focus on finding the right types of customers.
What Makes for Successful Salespeople?
To learn what traits and competencies characterize people 
who thrive selling new products, we began by analyzing 
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

FOR ARTICLE REPRINTS CALL 800-988-0886 OR 617-783-7500, OR VISIT HBR.ORG
Harvard Business Review 
November–December 2018    7
individuals greatly value personal growth. Others have a 
performance orientation, craving praise for superior work  
or dreading poor evaluations. A recent study by Annie Chen 
of Westminster Business School and colleagues looked at 
how differences in goal orientation affected salespeople’s 
belief in their abilities and their motivation to sell new 
products. They found that those with a strong learning 
orientation were confident and eager to meet the challenge. 
Salespeople with a performance orientation fell into two 
camps: Those who framed the challenge as an opportunity 
for praise felt the same way that people with a learning 
orientation did, but those who dreaded poor evaluations 
worried they would fail and consequently were less likely  
to put effort into selling the product.
We looked at how goal orientation affects sales over time 
at one of the five companies in our study and found that 
performance suffers initially, when a product is launched, 
regardless of which orientation a salesperson has. Reps 
with a learning orientation spend more time acquiring new 
sources of information and experimenting with different 
strategies and less time selling; their performance tends 
to suffer more at first than that of performance-oriented 
salespeople. In effect, they are making a conscious trade-
off—and the period of active learning yields a long-term 
payoff. Once they understand the market and have found 
effective strategies, their performance eventually stabilizes 
at a higher level than that of their performance-oriented 
peers. For managers this demonstrates that giving salespeo-
ple time to experiment and learn about the market will pay 
off in the long run, but you need the courage to weather an 
early performance dip.
They are knowledgeable, customer focused, and 
adaptable. We identified several other characteristics 
associated with success in selling new products. Salespeople 
need both product knowledge and market knowledge—an 
understanding of market trends and customer buying pat-
terns. Given the changes that will take place in the custom-
er’s business if the offering is adopted, they need customer 
focus—a predisposition to meet customer needs above and 
beyond what is required. And the pace of change means they 
need adaptability to adjust their internal processes and style 
quickly according to feedback from the team, other manag-
ers, and market influences.
To examine whether all salespeople—the more and the 
less successful ones—recognize whether they have the 
needed characteristics, we compared how they and their 
customers rated their abilities on the above dimensions. The 
pattern was striking: Confident in their own abilities, most 
salespeople gave themselves high ratings across the board. 
Customers, however, gave them high ratings on product 
knowledge only—on most dimensions their evaluations were 
only about a third as high as the salespeople’s own, and less 
than a tenth as high on adaptability. The salespeople thought 
they were adjusting quite well to outside influences, but cus-
tomers saw them as stuck in their ways. It is clear from this 
analysis that sales organizations need to provide guidance 
and support for their team members’ improvement.
A Culture That Supports New-Product Sales
Frontline sales managers play a central role in executing 
organic growth strategies, because they deal with the 
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

8    
Harvard Business Review
November–December 2018
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

The best companies customize training to meet  
individual needs and tie assessments to performance.
FOR ARTICLE REPRINTS CALL 800-988-0886 OR 617-783-7500, OR VISIT HBR.ORG
Harvard Business Review 
November–December 2018    9
toughest people decisions on a day-to-day basis. During the 
product launch phase they help existing salespeople learn 
new behaviors and keep up morale when performance dips. 
If the company is building a sales force from scratch to  
support a new product, these managers are responsible  
for hiring people with the appropriate skills and abilities.  
If the company is launching a new growth strategy, they  
must translate it into actions that will work in the field— 
a challenging job, because they need to make decisions 
without knowing exactly what will work.
We found that the best companies use competency assess-
ment and training programs to help frontline sales managers 
effectively meet those challenges. Competency assessments 
identify individual salespeople’s strengths and weaknesses 
by measuring traits and skills; their sophistication varies 
widely across companies. Many organizations don’t map 
and assess competencies at all—or if they do, it’s in a general 
way, not with an eye to selling new products. Companies may 
develop group training programs to address deficiencies in 
the sales force, but the main focus of such programs is to help 
people take stock of their own abilities.
Assess skills systematically. The best companies take 
this a step further by customizing training to meet individual 
needs and tying assessments to performance. Metrics such 
as new-product sales productivity and new-product share 
of wallet are used to discern who is excelling in the market-
place. Managers use the assessments to guide one-on-one 
coaching sessions about specific behaviors that will lead to 
higher performance and to develop focused learning plans. 
During the launch phase of a new product, the companies 
don’t know exactly what skills will be needed for success, so 
they make an educated guess. They revisit their competency 
maps as it becomes clear who is thriving in the market and 
revise their training programs to overcome deficiencies.  
They create a culture in which salespeople aspire to grow.
The training required in these programs tends to be broad, 
encompassing both skill building and personal growth, 
because new products test salespeople’s self-confidence.  
For example, a media company told us that its salespeople 
were becoming so overwhelmed by the pace of change in the 
digital market that they could not engage with customers. 
They could ask the right questions to assess customer needs 
and had adequate product knowledge, but they couldn’t 
bring themselves to discuss solutions. A constant stream  
of digital disruptions shook their confidence in their under-
standing of the market, and they did not want to appear 
ignorant to their customers.
Train for knowledge and resilience. The media company 
took a two-pronged approach to this problem. To address 
knowledge concerns, it created a market awareness training 
program. After that ended, it provided regular updates on 
trends in digital media so that salespeople could help their 
customers make sense of where the market was moving. But 
more important, it provided its people with coping mech-
anisms to make them more comfortable with the pace of 
change. The emotional barriers to making a sale were bigger 
than the knowledge barriers. One senior manager described 
the challenge this way: “Our salespeople could assess the 
customer’s needs and offer appropriate solutions. But the dis-
ruption in the digital market was so overwhelming that they 
did not feel clear about what they were supposed to do. They 
were stuck in place until we could get them over this hurdle. 
To help them cope, we asked them to reflect on what their 
role was and was not. We found that it was helpful for them 
to write down their thoughts in a journal. We needed them to 
recognize that they did not have to be an expert in all things.”
Salespeople (like many others) often don’t want to see 
that the world is changing and need prodding to learn new 
behaviors. Competency assessments foster behavioral 
change because they provide data from an outside source 
about where salespeople’s skills need improvement. These 
assessments are most effective when questions focus on 
specific behaviors—such as “When selling new products, do 
you first go to existing customers to gauge their reactions?”—
and respondents cannot guess at the right answers. Making 
comparisons that force them to wrestle with difficult facts 
can foster behavioral change. For example, an individual’s 
skills and behaviors can be benchmarked against the best 
salespeople at innovative companies in the industry, the  
best salespeople at his or her own firm, or customers’ assess-
ments. The goal is to provide the manager with enough data 
for any discussions that need to take place.
Competency assessments also encourage sales managers 
to focus on what the world should be rather than what it is.  
If a product represents a change in direction for the company, 
assessments can help determine who will be able to operate 
Sales
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

10    
Harvard Business Review
November–December 2018
in the new world and who will struggle. If the company is 
building a new sales force to support the product, assess-
ments can help determine what to look for in job candidates 
and how to screen for the right traits. Changing behavior is as 
difficult for sales managers as it is for salespeople. Successful 
managers sometimes think, I know from experience what 
works, so why should I change? When problems arise in the 
field, these managers tend to blame the product rather than 
the salespeople or themselves. If the sales management team 
is stuck in the old world, significant turnover may be needed. 
In an extreme case, we have seen half of a frontline sales 
management team turn over in one year because its members 
could not make the necessary leap.
The Benefits of Strategic Account Management
We also found that the best companies often launch new 
products through strategic account management programs. 
Strategic account managers (SAMs), who are assigned to 
the most important customers, are permitted to take a 
longer-term perspective for business development and are 
responsible for building a useful network at all levels of their 
customers’ organizations. They help the field sales team 
overcome challenges as they arise. SAMs typically receive 
more long-term incentives as part of their compensation 
than regular salespeople do; companies with SAMs typically 
experience higher sales costs but usually see a return on 
that investment. At large companies SAMs help break down 
internal barriers between business divisions that prevent 
important conversations with customers. One member of an 
operating board commented, “If I were to ask our business 
division heads if we needed a strategic accounts manage-
ment program, they would all say no, because they worry 
about the cost. But from my position, I know that those 
programs are a key driver of our growth.”
Make sure someone’s looking at the big picture. It is 
best practice for SAMs to hold regular planning meetings 
with customers and establish mutually beneficial goals to 
support the sale of new products. This form of planning and 
collaboration allows SAMs to become intimately familiar 
with customers’ business practices, culture, and strategies. 
They analyze their customers’ industries and identify their 
customers’ strengths and weaknesses relative to competi-
tors in the market. Intimately working together on strategic 
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

FOR ARTICLE REPRINTS CALL 800-988-0886 OR 617-783-7500, OR VISIT HBR.ORG
Harvard Business Review 
November–December 2018    11
priorities lowers barriers to adoption for new products. Trust 
is established, so customers don’t worry that the seller is 
holding back information about the product and are confi-
dent that the seller understands the challenges they will face 
as the product is rolled out to users.
SAMs make sure that experts are connecting and new 
opportunities are surfaced at lower levels of both companies. 
Describing a typical success story, one commented, “Once a 
business unit told me that the customer was not interested in 
energy storage technologies. They had asked the wrong peo-
ple. I put them in contact with the customer’s R&D center, 
where I knew that a team of eight people worked on storage 
innovation, and that team was indeed interested in cooperat-
ing with us.” When the right connections are made, the two 
companies often jointly develop technologies, promoting an 
even deeper level of trust.
Build partnerships with your best clients. SAMs are 
responsible for bringing together the senior leadership 
teams to show how the two companies can grow together. 
Senior leaders at the selling organizations demonstrate their 
personal commitment to these programs by regularly calling 
on customers and holding strategy meetings with SAMs. 
One senior leader explained, “The involvement of the board 
shows our commitment to customer centricity; it builds trust 
between the board and the customer’s top executives and 
provides the board a more direct view of what customers 
want. This program gives the SAMs further strength via our 
top management inside and outside the organization.” Com-
mitment at this level helps the operating team understand 
its customers’ challenges and anticipate problems that might 
be created by the adoption of a new product. And it reassures 
customers that problems will be addressed in a timely man-
ner, lowering the risk associated with making a purchase.
Senior leaders also use strategic account management to 
balance the need for long-term growth with pressure to meet 
short-term earnings targets, which can create tension in sales 
organizations and undermine a company’s ability to sell new 
products. Our research suggests that senior leaders resolve 
some of this pressure by letting SAMs focus on long-term 
goals and managing earnings through nonstrategic relation-
ships. In one study we found that most companies use their 
sales organizations to manage earnings targets—81% of senior 
sales leaders said that their CEO, and 75% said that their CFO, 
requests revenue or expense management actions to smooth 
earnings. But the leaders did not treat all accounts equally: 
We found that the biggest factor in letting customers become 
strategic accounts was their potential for long-term growth, 
and that senior leaders were about half as likely to request 
short-term actions in strategic accounts as in others. One SAM 
described his company’s focus this way: “We see consistency 
as being a driver of strategic relationships and are willing to 
suffer through periods of reduced profitability to maintain 
prog­ress.” This long-term focus is key to selling new products.
SUCCESSFULLY EXECUTING an organic growth strategy 
requires a deep and lasting commitment from the entire 
senior leadership team, because bringing new-to-the-world 
products to market transforms selling organizations as 
much as it transforms buying organizations. The best com-
panies are strategically aligned, from the sales force to the 
C-suite, when new products are launched. They recognize 
that selling these products involves different barriers, and 
they develop new processes to overcome them. HR creates 
competency maps to assess the skills and behaviors needed 
to sell the products and works with sales managers to estab-
lish the necessary training and coaching programs. Front-
line sales managers buy into the strategy behind a product 
launch and support the learning process that salespeople 
go through in the field. The C-suite maintains a long-term 
orientation by nurturing strategic accounts and making sure 
that pressure to meet earnings targets does not stand in the 
way of future growth.
At the best companies we visited for our interviews, the 
entire sales organization takes pride in having developed a 
long-term mindset regarding organic growth. These compa-
nies recognize that investing in R&D is not enough to ensure 
that it will bear fruit; they make the same commitment to 
commercialization that they make to idea development. Too 
much is at stake to do otherwise. 

HBR Reprint R1806G
THOMAS STEENBURGH is the Richard S. Reynolds Professor and 
senior associate dean for faculty development at the University 
of Virginia’s Darden School of Business. MICHAEL AHEARNE is a 
professor and the C.T. Bauer Chair in Marketing at the University of 
Houston and the research director of the Sales Excellence Institute.
Senior leaders should allow strategic account 
managers to focus on long-term goals.
Sales
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
