

“Steve’s latest book provides an essential developmental tool for all our
sales associates.”
John McGinty, Chief Customer Oﬃ  cer, Nestlé Purina
“Everything happens in negotiation for a reason. Th is excellent book 
explains the negotiation process and how you can secure the best total
value. A must-read if you are to be successful.”
Ken McKnight, President, CRH Asia
“Th is is what I have been looking for. An intelligent and pragmatic guide
to understanding and developing your negotiation skills in a dynamic and
challenging world.” 
Claire Lenighan, Head of Trader and Supplier 
Engagement, Asda Walmart
“Th e Negotiation Book with interesting updated real life examples. Steve 
k
and his team from Gap Partnership has over the last 10 years trained
over hundreds of my company’s executives and has helped to generate of 
millions of dollars of value. Th e Negotiation Book’s collaborative method
of negotiation helps in gaining agreement that not only results in value
for all parties involved but also enhances relationships. It emphasizes on
the psychological and behavioral aspects of the negotiator, which is the
one of the single most important factor in a successful negotiation. I hope
that this book will inspire the readers to continually practice and train
themselves to become a ‘complete skilled negotiator’. ”
John Lim, General Manager, Supply Chain & Procurement Asia Paciﬁ c, 
Middle East and Africa, ConocoPhillips
“An unputdownable step-by-step guide to successful negotiations. Es-
sential for business professionals, it oﬀ ers universally acceptable ‘around
the clock’ negotiation methods supported heavily by easy-to-understand
case studies. Very practical.”
Poitr Malita, Commercial Capability Director,
Coca-Cola HBC

“It just makes sense! If you fully absorb what Steve has to say, you should
feel conﬁ dent and fairly sure of the positive outcome of your negotiation
before you even enter the room!”
Simon Duncan, Director of External
Business, House of Fraser
“Th e concepts and framework presented within this book are invalu-
able in helping you prepare and execute your negotiation strategy. Th is
negotiation ‘blueprint’ will ensure that readers have every opportunity to
secure long term sustainable agreements with their trade partners.”
Martin Porter, Sales Managing Director, Heineken

THE NEGOTIATION
BOOK
YOUR DEFINITIVE GUIDE 
TO SUCCESSFUL NEGOTIATING
Second edition
Steve Gates

Th is edition ﬁ rst published 2016
© 2016 Steve Gates 
First edition published 2011 by John Wiley and Sons Ltd
Registered oﬃ  ce
John Wiley and Sons Ltd, Th e Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, United Kingdom
For details of our global editorial oﬃ  ces, for customer services and for information about how to apply for
permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com.
Th e right of the author to be identiﬁ ed as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by
the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material included
with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in print-on-demand. If this book 
refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you purchased, you may download this
material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names
and product names used in this book and on its cover are trade names, service marks, trademark or registered
trademarks of their respective owners. Th e publisher and the book are not associated with any product or vendor
mentioned in this book. None of the companies referenced within the book have endorsed the book.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best eﬀ orts in prepar-
ing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the
contents of this book and speciﬁ cally disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or ﬁ tness for a particular
purpose. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services and
neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for damages arising here from. If professional advice or other
expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Gates, Steve, author.
 Th e negotiation book : your deﬁ nitive guide to successful negotiating / Steve Gates. — Second edition.
  pages cm
 Includes index.
 ISBN 978-1-119-15546-1 (pbk.) 1. Negotiation in business.
2. Negotiation in business—Case studies. I. Title.
 HD58.6.G38 2016
 658.4′052—dc23
 
2015025693
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN 978-1-119-15546-1 (paperback)
ISBN 978-1-119-15551-5 (ebk)
ISBN 978-1-119-15552-2 (ebk)
Cover design: Wiley
Set in 11.5/15pt Adobe Jenson Pro Regular by Aptara, New Delhi, India 
Printed in Great Britain by TJ International Ltd, Padstow, Cornwall, UK

Contents
About the Author 
vii
Acknowledgments
ix
Preface
xi
Chapter 1 – So You Th ink You Can Negotiate? 
1
Chapter 2 – Th e Negotiation Clock Face 
15
Chapter 3 – Why Power Matters 
33
Chapter 4 – Th e Ten Negotiation Traits 
55
Chapter 5 – Th e Fourteen Behaviors that Make the Diﬀ erence 
69
Chapter 6 – Th e “E” Factor 
99
Chapter 7 – Authority and Empowerment 
125
Chapter 8 – Tactics and Values 
143
Chapter 9 –  Planning and Preparation that Helps You to
Build Value 
169
Final Th oughts 
201
About Th e Gap Partnership 
203
Index
207


 About the Author 
Steve Gates is founder and CEO of Th e Gap
Partnership, the world's leading negotiation con-
sultancy.  Since 1997 Steve has consulted with and
supported global corporations from all business
sectors facing the challenge of optimizing value
from their many and varied negotiations. His
interest in commerce, capitalism, and psychology
continues to inspire his innovative ﬂ air and pas-
sion for greater insights into the art and science of negotiation. His home
remains in the UK. 


 Acknowledgments 
 I would like to thank an exceptional team of negotiators from across
Th e Gap Partnership with whom I have shared so many experiences and
drawn so much inspiration. Th ey have committed their lives to pushing 
negotiation capability to a new level, which has allowed me to write this
account of the Complete Skilled Negotiator – a philosophy based on the
human challenges of negotiating today, which they have all helped build
and which serves to inspire our clients around the world, every day. 


Preface  
 I thought I would ﬁ nd you here. Curious? You should be. Negotiation
is fundamental to your life and the way you distribute, create, protect,
resolve, and manage anything of value. It is central to the viability of every
business, for even non-proﬁ t-making organizations. It has delivered peace
in war, resolved bedtime tantrums with our children, helped avoid mil-
lions of court cases, and has probably helped save a few marriages along 
the way too. It is how you resolve diﬀ erences and form agreements based
on mutually acceptable terms. It can represent the diﬀ erence between
viability and insolvency, proﬁ t making or loss, growth or decline; such is
the power of the outcomes.
 Great negotiators often go unnoticed. Th ey are not interested in win-
ning or glory. Th ey have an attitude of mind that is focused on the hard
work of building agreements and protecting this work through the neces-
sary conﬁ dentiality that follows. However, great negotiators – and maybe
you – recognize that the return on time invested is dramatic, perhaps in
relationships, time saved, risk reduced, proﬁ t made, or even dilemmas
resolved. No other skill oﬀ ers so much value in return for competent
performance. 
 Th is second edition is aimed at providing a modern, up-to-date guide
to how to negotiate in today's world. I have set out to provide you with
an insight into negotiation from a practitioner's perspective. It is not

PREFACE
xii
prescriptive, but aims to help you to get better deals by being aware that
it is you who are responsible for making decisions based on your own
judgement. Th e amount of time people actually spend negotiating is very
small in the context of their whole job and yet the consequences of their
performance during negotiations will often distinguish how successful
they are. Th e art and science of negotiation is an interactivity that is in-
ﬂ uenced by culture, ever-changing circumstances, expectation, capability,
and personal chemistry. Th e Complete Skilled Negotiator is an individual
who has both the skills and mindset to do that which is appropriate to
their circumstances and the ability to maximize opportunity during each
and every negotiation. 
 So why this second edition? Well, over the past decade there is not
much that has changed about how people and companies negotiate. Th ere
has, however, been a rapid change around what they are negotiating over
and the value attributed to time, risk, convenience, and information as the
beneﬁ ts of technology are realized in all our lives. I've taken a fresh look 
at some of these agreements and how, in some industries, information
access has become as valuable as payment terms, or response service times
as important as contract length. Technology is changing what is possible,
what is expected, and what is traded, which is providing a new mix of 
variables featuring in all types of agreements. More negotiations are being 
conducted through multiple forms of communication. What used to be
face-to-face, telephone, and email negotiations can now include video
conferencing from your telephone, meeting rooms from anywhere round
the world, online data rooms, online auctions, and the list goes on. 
 Th e abilities of the Complete Skilled Negotiator, however, remain the
same. Th ey are balanced in their thinking, have their ego in check and
are focused on understanding the interests and priorities of the other
party. Th ey are chameleon like in their approach, in that they know how
to be what they need to be depending on their circumstances, and are not
burdened by personal values that wear away at their consciousness. Th eir
ability to read situations, take the time to prepare, and have the capacity to
think around the issues, as well as deal with the relationship dynamics at

PREFACE
xiii
the same time, helps them perform in a conﬁ dent manner. Most of all, they
focus on the potential of the deal rather than trying to win, understanding 
that being competitive will only serve to attract friction, which is generally
counterproductive (unless used for a speciﬁ c purpose). 
 It can be the most rewarding of skills to exercise and the most nerve
wracking. Is it any wonder that to provide a standard that helps ev-
eryone to negotiate more eﬀ ectively has proved such a challenge to so
many in the past? Yet simple disciplines, proactive planning, and a clear,
conscious state of mind can provide a signiﬁ cant uplift in what you can
achieve.
 So what do I mean by a standard? Th e Negotiation Book covers the traits
k
and behaviors associated with the Complete Skilled Negotiator. I use
the word complete rather than successful because who are we to judge
if your performances are as successful as they might be? We will never
know. Th e standard also refers to a clock face model that provides a way
of diﬀ erentiating the range of ways we negotiate in a dynamic, capitalist
market. Importantly it also recognizes that, although the concepts of 
power, process, and behavior have much to do with performance, so do
the psychology, self-discipline, and human interaction that make up the
framework. Th e standard is not here to restrict but to empower you as a
Complete Skilled Negotiator to negotiate that which is possible … given
those opportunities you are presented with. 
 Th e experience I have gained from practical hands-on involvement in
having negotiated with some of the largest corporations on the planet, in-
cluding P&G, Walmart, Morgan Stanley, Nestlé, GE, and Vodafone, has
helped me to provide this account of the standard that has been adopted
in the business world. I have also been privileged to work with dozens of 
highly skilled negotiation practitioners at Th e Gap Partnership who have
negotiated with, advised, and developed hundreds of such organizations
globally. It is this experience that has helped us to crystallize what our
clients have come to call “the standard” for negotiating. 
 I am about to share with you a way of thinking, behaving, and performing,
together with a standard for doing so. Th ere is no magic formula or magic

PREFACE
xiv
wand, but there are principles that will help you to secure agreements
with others who may not always see the world the way you do. Th is book 
is about you
 
 gaining more value from every agreement you're involved in,
understanding what to do, when to do it and, most importantly, providing 
you with the inspiration to do it. 

 CHAPTER   1   
 So You Think You Can
Negotiate? 
 “It is what we know already that often prevents us from learning.” 
 Claude Bernard 
 SO WHAT IS NEGOTIATION?
 Negotiation is a necessity, a process, and an art. It evokes complex
feelings that many seek to avoid and yet it is fundamental to how
business gets done and takes place millions of times a day around the
world. If you can take control of yourself, your values and prejudices,
your need for fairness, and your ego, you may start to realize the best
possible outcomes in your negotiations. The biggest challenge here is
not in educating you in how to be a better negotiator, but motivating 
you to change the way you think about negotiations and yourself. Of 
the many thousands of negotiation workshops I have provided at The
Gap Partnership, the greatest change I see clients make is that of self-
awareness. Learning about negotiation is an exercise in self-awareness
because understanding yourself and what effect a negotiation can
have on you, enables you to accommodate the pressures, dilemmas,
and stresses that go with it. Self-awareness helps us to recognize why
we do the things we do and the effect this has on our results. It also
helps us adapt our approach and our behavior to suit each negotiation

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK
2
rather than trying to make one approach fit every situation, simply
because it suits our personal style.  
 Why bother negotiating? 
 Just because everything is negotiable doesn’t mean that everything has
to be negotiated. Th e value of your time versus the potential beneﬁ t that
can be achieved by negotiating is always a consideration. Why spend ten
minutes negotiating over the price of a $10 notebook when you normally
make $100 an hour? So you may save $2 – that’s 20 cents a minute! How-
ever, if it is your next car and a 5% saving could equate to $1500, the time
is probably worth investing.
 Th ere will be situations involving more important decisions where you
are mutually dependent and yet hold diﬀ erent views. When an agreement
needs working through, eﬀ ective negotiation can help provide not only a
solution but potentially a solution that both of you are motivated to carry
through. 
 There is no other skill set that can have such an
immediate and measurable level of impact on your
bottom line than negotiation. A small adjustment
to the payment terms, the specification, the  volume
threshold , or even the delivery date will all impact
on the value or profitability of the agreement.
Understanding the effects of these moves, and
the values they represent to you from the outset, is why planning is
fundamental to effective negotiation. The skill in building enhanced
agreements through trading off against different interests, values,
and priorities is negotiation. In the business context it is known as
the skill of profit maximization.  
 So, eﬀ ective negotiation provides the opportunity to build or dissolve
value – but what does value really mean? It can be too easy and is too
often a focus on price. Th e question of  “how much?” is one, transparent,
measurable issue and, because of this, is also the most contentious issue
in the majority of negotiations.
 volume threshold 
 This term is used to determine a
level at which benefi ts such as
pricing, discounts, delivery, or
other services become applicable.

SO YOU THINK YOU CAN NEGOTIATE?
3
 Yet price is but one variable you can negotiate over. 
It  is possible to get a great price and feel as though you 
have won and yet get a very poor deal at the same time.
For example, because the item did not arrive on time,
or it fell apart after being used twice, or it had no ﬂ exibility about it, and
so on. (Ever heard the saying “you get what you pay for”?)  
 In negotiation, your ego and your competitiveness might fuel the need
to “win,” especially where you allow a sense of competition to become
involved. However, negotiating agreements is not about competing or
winning; it is about securing the best value. Th is means understanding:
•  what the other person or party wants, needs or believes; 
•  what they do; and
•  how that aﬀ ects the possibilities. 
 As a Complete Skilled Negotiator your focus needs to
be on what is important to the other party:  their inter-
r
ests, priorities, options, if any, their deadlines, and their
pressure points . Try to see the deal as they see it. If you 
set out to understand them and their motivations, you
may be able to use these insights to your advantage and, ultimately, increase
the value of the deal for yourself. Being driven to beat the other party will
distract you from your main objective, which is usually to maximize value
from the agreement. 
 Proactivity and control 
 Your ﬁ rst task is to be proactive – to take control of the way you negotiate.
To map out the issues, formulate an agenda which helps you to negoti-
ate agreement in a way that will serve your objectives. Try to be honest
with yourself when deciding or agreeing on what these are. Remember,
price is only one element of the deal and winning on price may not result
in your attracting the best deal. You may need cooperation to the point
where the other party not only agrees to go ahead but is also prepared to
variable
This can be a price or any term of 
condition that needs to be agreed.
pressure points
Pressure points are things, times
or circumstances which infl uence 
the other party’s position of 
power.

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK
4
honor their commitment. Th ere is absolutely no place for your ego in your
r
negotiations. Th e single thing that matters is the total value  over the life
time of the agreement .  
 Becoming comfortable with being uncomfortable 
 Th e person on the other side of the negotiating table may well take up a
tough position, which could make you feel challenged or even competi-
tive. Becoming more comfortable with being uncomfortable in situations 
like this, where you are also likely to experience pressure and tension is
one of the most important prerequisites of a skilled negotiator. Without
this, our ability to think and perform can become compromised. So you
need to recognize that, by negotiating, you are involved in a process and
the people you negotiate with need time to adjust as part of engaging in
this process. Typically this is when: 
• any new risks, obligations, conditions, or consequences are presented; and
• any new proposals that you make, which materially change the value
of the agreement. 
 EMPOWERED, INEXPERIENCED NEGOTIATORS
REPRESENT A REAL RISK  
 The adoption of cloud-based technology solutions into organiza-
tions has created a fast-changing, complex environment where
it’s important not only to have technology specialists on your side,
but a negotiator who can make sense of the variables featured in
contracts. 
 PIC, a Paris-based consultancy business, were keen to invest
in a new HR management system to help manage the challenges
around managing their ever growing team. During their research
they identifi ed a solution which also offered an integrated Learning
Management Systems (LMS). This is a platform for managing staff

SO YOU THINK YOU CAN NEGOTIATE?
5
development and also houses content for training purposes
that staff can access.
People Technologies, the potential supplier, made a compel-
ling pitch to PIC on the basis that their LMS system might also be
used as a platform for servicing PIC’s own clients. This meant
that PIC would acquire not only a system that serviced its own
business but a solution which could extend their service offering
to their own clients.
The newly appointed technology manager sold the idea to the
board of PIC who were impressed with his creative thinking. The
annual license fee was twice the budget allocation but the client-
facing provision was sold as a real opportunity to “provide a
monetized technology solution to its clients,” won the board over.
The board bought the idea and signed a 3-year contract.
However, it soon became apparent that the venture was a fi rst
for People Technologies. Although a large business, it had never
provided its service to a client as a resale facility. There were
issues that had not been thought through, such as chargeable
licensing and the fact that PIC would be liable for every one of its
client users. Issues around integration and maintenance had not
been fully understood or negotiated by the technology manager.
The board had assumed his understanding of the interdependen-
cies. Within weeks, the CFO having faced questions from the
operations team investigated the implications of the contract and
realized that the opportunity lacked coherence. It subsequently
cost the company half the cost of the 3-year contract to exit and
the technology manager his job. 
So, even though the board had committed to a solution for
twice the cost of their budget on the basis of it serving other
client-based services, the ill suited solution had to be abandoned
within months. 

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK
6
 In business meetings, people can become frustrated, emotional, and
upset if they feel that you are simply being irrational or unfair with your
proposals. Some will even walk away before considering the consequences.
 For this reason, the more experienced the negotiator you are working 
with, the less chance you will have of a deadlocked conversation. Th ey
are more likely to understand that they are involved in a process and that
nothing is agreed until everything is agreed and sometimes the process can
be frustrating. In fact, their experience can result in you attracting a better
deal than when you negotiate with an untrained negotiator. Many of my
clients insist that their suppliers attend the same training in negotiation
as they do, as part of ensuring that both parties work towards maximizing 
total value rather than becoming distracted by short-term gains and/or
trying to “win”.
 THE NEED FOR SATISFACTION
 Everyone likes to secure a bargain; to buy something at a better price
than was available before. You only have to visit department stores on
December 27 to witness the eﬀ ect that securing a bargain can have on
people’s behavior. Such can be the frenzy that it is not unknown for vio-
lence to be used where one person feels another has pushed ahead of them
in the queue. Many people just can’t help themselves when there’s a good
bargain to be had. In extreme cases people will buy things they don’t want
or even need if the price is right. 
 In business, though, what is the right price? Th e answer depends on a
whole range of other issues, which, of course, need to be negotiated. So how
do you manage the other party’s need for satisfaction? Th at is, their natural
need to feel as though they got a better deal than was originally available.
• Do you start out with an extreme opening on price?
• Do you introduce conditions that you are ready to concede on? 
• Do you build in red herrings (issues that are not real, that you can
easily, and you expect to, concede)? 

SO YOU THINK YOU CAN NEGOTIATE?
7
 Th e psychological challenge here is to provide the other party with the
satisfaction of having achieved, through hard work, a great deal for  them-
selves. In other words letting them “win,” or letting them have your
 
way.
r
 Negotiating versus selling 
 It is a commonly held view that a good “sale” will
close itself and that negotiation follows only when
outstanding diﬀ erences remain. However, negotiation
as a skill and as a process is fundamentally diﬀ erent
from selling. To sell is to promote the positives, the
match, to align the solution to the need. It requires
explanation, justiﬁ cation, and a rational case. “Th e gift
of the gab” is associated with the salesman who has an
enthusiastic answer for everything. Negotiation does
not. Although relationships can be important, as is
the climate for cooperation (without which you have
no discussion), the behavior of the Complete Skilled
Negotiator also involves  silence , where appropriate.
Th at means listening to everything the other party is
saying, understanding everything they are not saying,
and working out their true position. 
 Negotiation involves planning, questioning, listening, and making pro-
posals, but it also requires you to recognize when the selling has eﬀ ectively
concluded and the negotiation has begun. If you ﬁ nd yourself selling the
beneﬁ ts of your proposals during a negotiation, you are demonstrating a
weakness and probably giving away power. It suggests that you don’t feel
that your proposals are strong enough and that they require further pro-
moting. Th e more you talk, the more you are likely to make a concession. 
 So, recognizing when the change from selling to negotiating has taken
place is critical. You are now negotiating. It is simple enough to shut up,
listen, and think, whilst exercising patience. If this silence feels uncom-
fortable, it is; because you are now negotiating.
 silence 
 Silence offers you the time to
think and contemplate before 
responding. It allows you to 
listen to the other party to really
understand. It requires discipline
and concentration. The unnerving
consequence of silence is that 
the other party continues to talk 
and ultimately make unplanned 
concessions. At the very least 
they often provide you with more
information than they intended. 

THE NEGOTIATION BOOK
8
 PERSONAL VALUES 
 Values such as fairness, integrity, honesty, and trust naturally encourage
us to be open. Personal values have their place within any relationship but
business relationships can and often do exist, based on diﬀ erent value sets.
 Values are usually deep-rooted and many people feel very defensive
about them, as if their very integrity was being challenged. Th e point
here is that they are not right or wrong. I am not suggesting that eﬀ ective
negotiators have no values – we all do. However, in negotiation, when
you are involved in a process, what you  do  and what you are need not be
the same thing. Th is is not about challenging who you are, but it is about
helping you to change the things you do . 
 If you want to remain loyal to your values during negotiation there is
nothing wrong with this. However, others may not be as faithful to theirs,
which could leave you compromised. In other words, if you choose to
be open and honest by, for example, sharing information with the other
party and they decide not to reciprocate, guess who will gain the balance
of power? And how appropriate is that?
 Where natural economic laws, such as supply and demand, result in
people doing business with each other, a cooperative relationship can
help to create greater opportunities but it is not always critical. Trust
and honesty are great corporate values: they are defendable and safe,
especially when you have a business involving hundreds or thousands
of people buying or selling on behalf of one business. Th ey also help
promote sustainable business relationships. However, in a negotiation,
these values can be the root of complacency, familiarity, and even lazy at-
titudes that end up costing shareholders money. I remain a strong believer
in collaborative relationships but with the emphasis on optimizing value
whilst ensuring the best interests of all involved.
 The case for collaboration
 If you prefer collaborative negotiations it could be because: 
• you need the commitment and motivation of the other party in order
to deliver on what you have agreed; 
