Talent Management
The (New) Skills You Need to
Succeed in Sales
by Lynette Ryals and Javier Marcos
August 1, 2012
The practice of business-to-business selling is in a curious state.
On the one hand, commentators and academics are repeatedly
telling us that transactional selling is outmoded and that
relational selling is the ‘new normal.’ On the other hand, most
businesses are operating with traditional models of salesperson
recruitment and training. The American Society for Training and
Development (ASTD) estimates that in the U.S., $15 billion is spent
per year on sales training. However, many salespeople find the
training they receive either ineffective or less than useful. Given
the importance of skills and capabilities to sales performance,
businesses need to reconsider who they recruit into sales roles,
and how they train them.
Put simply, we all we tend to recruit people like ourselves. This in
turn means that existing cultures, styles and modes of behavior
tend to perpetuate themselves. Trouble is, business-to-business
selling has been undergoing a revolution. Traditional sales
methods are increasingly unproductive. In fact, aggressive sales
styles and product-focused selling are now so outdated that some
customers are simply refusing to meet with salespeople using
these techniques. These customers find it more pleasant and
more efficient to order online, and who can blame them?
Information about product and service features is increasingly
available online, so sales people find themselves in front of well-
prepared customers. In this situation, focusing on product
features in the sales meeting is a waste of everyone’s time. In fact,
there is plenty of evidence that high-performing sales people are
those who listen and respond, who are flexible, and who think in
terms of developing a solution to an emerging customer problem.
2/17/25, 10:53 PM
The (New) Skills You Need to Succeed in Sales
https://hbr.org/2012/08/the-changing-face-of-sales
1/5

To find out what kind of people succeed in sales, and the kinds of
skills they need to have, we carried out interviews with thought
leaders in selling and sales management in the U.S. and the U.K.
These included top sales leaders in major corporations, leading
academics who have published in the sales field, and senior
practitioners within sales associations or research-oriented sales
consultancies.
Our research confirmed a growing trend: Salespeople today need
to engage in collaboration with the customer but also increasingly
with their own organization. Good selling is about transcending
2/17/25, 10:53 PM
The (New) Skills You Need to Succeed in Sales
https://hbr.org/2012/08/the-changing-face-of-sales
2/5

the customer-facing role and becoming an internal change agent
as well.
Our thought leaders identified two major drivers for this change:
the use of technology, and changes in customer demands.
Increased use of technology, they told us, means that online
channels are substituting for traditional face-to-face meetings,
and CRM systems are providing new insights into customers. On
the customer side, our informants talked about ever-increasing
customer expectations and more emphasis on return on
investment and value. Our analysis revealed four categories of
skills and capabilities that sales people need in this new
environment: Commercial, Relational, Managerial, and Cognitive.
Commercial skills and capabilities are about financial insight,
business acumen and customer insight — specifically, insight
beyond what the customer has articulated. In complex relational
sales, customers expect business-to-business sales people to act as
business consultants and demonstrate a broad strategic
understanding of their organization and the impact on the
customer’s bottom line of the solutions they sell.
Relational skills and capabilities include the ability to manage
multi-level, multifunctional relationships, to understand
relational dynamics and to inspire trust. Across all the research
we have done in sales and Key Account Management, trust is
repeatedly cited by customers as important in their selection of a
supplier.
Managerial skills and capabilities needed by people in sales
roles include people management skills (because so much
business-to-business selling is now done in teams and cross-
functionally); high ethical standards and integrity (growing
customer demands in relation to corporate social responsibility
and ethics are changing selling behaviors); openness to change
and adaptability; and influencing skills.
2/17/25, 10:53 PM
The (New) Skills You Need to Succeed in Sales
https://hbr.org/2012/08/the-changing-face-of-sales
3/5

Cognitive skills and capabilities include innovative problem
solving; the ability to identify opportunities; the ability to work
under pressure; and mental toughness and resilience. These
cognitive skills are important in a consultative selling role
because the best future sales opportunities may be found within
existing customers, not necessarily within new customers, and
the sales person needs the skills to recognize and develop these
opportunities.
These skills and capabilities identified by our thought leaders
have some clear consequences for the recruitment and training of
sales people in business-to-business consultative selling roles.
Look again at the four elements: traditional selling skills are
conspicuous by their absence. In fact, the people best fitted to
these new sales roles may not necessarily be people from a sales
background. Instead, we see more people from technical or
operations backgrounds such as project management, R&D, or
supply chain moving into sales. They can be particularly adept at
problem-solving and cross-functional working. Perhaps we
should talk not about ‘sales people’ but about ‘people in a sales
role.’
This broader view of the sales professional has implications not
just for sales recruitment (“who”), but also for training and
development (“what” and “how”). People in a sales role need a
broad general management development that focuses on
commercial, relational, managerial and cognitive capabilities.
Sales leaders, HR directors and CEOs need to ask some tough
questions about how their organization is training its sales people
to develop these vital elements. Those responsible for
commissioning, designing and/or delivering sales training must
ensure that programs move beyond task-related knowledge and
skills and emphasize a fuller range of general management
competencies that are needed to manage increasingly complex
markets and business relationships.
2/17/25, 10:53 PM
The (New) Skills You Need to Succeed in Sales
https://hbr.org/2012/08/the-changing-face-of-sales
4/5

MORE ON SMARTER SALES
Stimulate Your Customer’s Lizard Brain to Make a Sale
The Game Buyers Play With Vendors
The Best Sales Leaders Are Trend Hunters
Turn a C-Level Customer Into Your Most Valuable Reference
Lynette Ryals and Javier Marcos Lynette
Ryals is professor of Strategic Sales and
Account Management at Cranfield University
School of Management. Javier Marcos is a
lecturer of sales performance at Cranfield’s
Centre for Strategic Marketing and Sales.
Read more on Talent management or related topics Career coaching and
Sales and marketing
LM
2/17/25, 10:53 PM
The (New) Skills You Need to Succeed in Sales
https://hbr.org/2012/08/the-changing-face-of-sales
5/5
