Digital
Article
Negotiations
We Often Overlook
Opportunities to
Negotiate
by Suzanne de Janasz
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

We Often Overlook
Opportunities to Negotiate
by Suzanne de Janasz
Published on HBR.org  /  August 26, 2021  /  Reprint H06JIR
Dennis Galante/Getty Images
During a workshop for mid- to senior-level career women, I posed the
following scenario:
While in your favorite department store, you spot a very attractive pair of
“professional” shoes. You happen to know that starting tomorrow, all
ladies’ shoes will be 30% off. What would you do?
Anne raised her hand confidently and responded, “I’d come back
tomorrow.” Pivoting quickly, I asked, “What if you’re leaving tomorrow
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  We Often Overlook Opportunities to Negotiate
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

morning for a week-long business trip?” She then responded with “Um…
maybe I’d see if I could order them online tomorrow at the sale price?”
It’s true, not everyone is motivated by a sale price. Similar low-stakes
negotiations — like asking your cable company for a better rate or asking
for a discount when offering to pay cash — may sometimes not seem
worth the effort. However, what if the discomfort you feel around asking
for a discount is just the tip of the iceberg? What if the fear of rejection —
of the request itself or of you personally — is keeping you from negotiating
for anything in the first place? And what if ignoring or avoiding most low-
stakes negotiation opportunities is keeping you from feeling confident and
competent when approaching more high-stakes negotiations?
If fear is keeping you from negotiating, it’s time to start using everyday
encounters to practice, so you can build your confidence and competence
for higher-stakes negotiations.
Recognizing Opportunities to Negotiate
Most books and articles about negotiation focus on how to prepare for a
negotiation, or offer strategies for engaging effectively. What these guides
fail to address is whether individuals recognize negotiation opportunities
in the first place. The ability to recognize an opportunity depends on your
perspective and your experience, as well as your culture, role models, and
goals. When shopping in a department store, most U.S. consumers see
prices as fixed — not open for bargaining. That’s less the case when
shopping in a flea market, where many items don’t have price tags and
sellers expect that some shoppers will attempt to haggle for a better price.
Beyond commercial opportunities (since not all negotiations involve
money/services/goods), what exactly is a negotiation opportunity? It can
range anywhere from a disagreement with a neighbor, to the allocation of
household chores, to your eligibility for a bonus at work. Consider asking
yourself the following questions about situations you encounter in your
everyday life:
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  We Often Overlook Opportunities to Negotiate
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

• Is this situation fair? Are others being offered better compensation, or
do they benefit from fewer responsibilities, more resources, a bonus, or
a better (cheaper, faster) deal?
• Do I deserve a better or more fair outcome than I have been offered? If
someone were to offer this to me now, would I hesitate to accept it?
• Am I feeling uneasy or hesitant about the situation or offer? Would a
more confident version of me make a request to get a better or more fair
outcome?
Tactical advice about negotiating isn’t useful if you fail to recognize or
engage in negotiation opportunities. To make matters worse, women
negotiate only about 25% as often as men do, and about 20% of all women
never negotiate at all. While some women worry about being perceived as
aggressive, others might ignore an opportunity to negotiate due to the
stress associated with a potential conflict. Many are simply too conflict-
avoidant, and others lack confidence in their ability to influence the
outcome.
Evaluating Whether to Engage in a Negotiation
Keep in mind that not all opportunities are worth engaging in. The costs
versus benefits calculus (relative to both the situation and the relationship)
simply might not add up. Going back to the shoe example: if the shoes are
$100, with the potential for a $30 savings, you might think, “Hmmm, I
can come back tomorrow and save $30, or I can pay the $100 now, and not
have to ask the salesperson an uncomfortable question (such as, “Excuse
me, but is there a way you can give me the 30% discount today? I’m
heading out of town tomorrow, and it would be great to get these shoes for
the price that others will pay for them in less than 24 hours.”) In this
evaluation, avoiding the discomfort — and the time such a conversation
might take —might be worth $30 for some people. But note that in this
example, one is considering the negotiation and making a choice about it,
as opposed to avoiding the situation altogether.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  We Often Overlook Opportunities to Negotiate
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Evaluating non-monetary issues can be a bit more complicated. Imagine
that you share an apartment with a close friend, and from the beginning,
you gravitated toward doing most of the cleaning, cooking, and laundry.
When the two of you moved in, you assumed that she would look after
herself. She would thank you from time to time, but her perceived laziness
has resulted in your growing resentment. You choose not to say anything,
afraid of stirring up trouble, but continue doing the majority of the
housework. Hints don’t work, and the occasional request is met with
defensiveness or empty promises to help.
You ask yourself: Is this fair? Do I deserve to be in a more equitable
situation? Is this a negotiation opportunity? Or is this the way things are and
I’m going to have to accept this inequitable situation until the lease ends or I
move out? Factoring in individual preferences and comfort levels, one
might choose not to negotiate…even when doing so could make a positive
difference. Perhaps it’s due to a fear of failure or a fear of rejection, but the
more you ignore conflictual situations that could be improved with
negotiation, the more you give such conflicts power over you. That chore
allocation discussion you avoided today might evolve into next week’s
avoided promotion/raise discussion. The first missed opportunity may
result in the degradation of a relationship; the second may result in a
serious loss of future earnings. When you consider that a $7,000 starting
salary difference over a 43-year career (ages 22-65) adds up to $649,000
(assuming a 3% annual increase), I’m guessing you’ll conclude that it’s very
worthwhile to negotiate.
By being mindful about recognizing and evaluating potential negotiation
opportunities — weighing the financial, emotional, moral, or psychological
trade-offs — you not only put yourself in a position to strategically
approach how to negotiate for what you deserve (e.g., money, recognition,
equitable treatment), but you also open the door to even better outcomes.
You’ll learn to improve relationships by working through conflicts. And
you’ll build a stronger “negotiation muscle” that will serve you well in
higher-stakes negotiations.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  We Often Overlook Opportunities to Negotiate
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

SJ
Suzanne de Janasz is Professor of Management and Conflict Analysis
& Resolution at George Mason University. For the past 25 years, she’s
been teaching negotiation to students and executives on five continents,
including programs designed specifically for women negotiators. In
addition to publishing dozens of practitioner articles on negotiation,
Dr. de Janasz is co-author of the text Negotiation and Dispute
Resolution.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  We Often Overlook Opportunities to Negotiate
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
