Digital
Article
Policy
What Theresa May Might
Learn From Woodrow
Wilson’s Failed
Negotiations in 1919
by Deepak Malhotra
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

What Theresa May Might
Learn From Woodrow
Wilson’s Failed Negotiations
in 1919
by Deepak Malhotra
Published on HBR.org  /  February 01, 2019  /  Reprint H04S1V
Christopher Furlong/Getty Images
On December 13, 2018, UK Prime Minister Theresa May met with her
European counterparts in an attempt to renegotiate the “Brexit deal”
she had reached with them only weeks earlier; the deal was facing harsh
criticism and almost certain rejection at home. Perhaps only the keenest
students of history could have noticed that when she landed in Brussels,
it was precisely 100 years — to the day — after another world leader, U.S.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What Theresa May Might Learn From Woodrow Wilson’s Failed…
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

President Woodrow Wilson, had visited the continent in the hopes of
saving it. Both the parallels and the perpendicularities between the
negotiation sagas of Theresa May and Woodrow Wilson are stunning.
On December 13, 1918, President Wilson arrived in France to negotiate a
new world order in the aftermath of World War I.  In many ways, the
visits by Wilson and May could not have been more dissimilar. Wilson
was an idealist who tried, albeit with little success, to portray himself as
a pragmatist.  May is a pragmatist who is awkwardly working to the brief
of an idealist. Wilson fashioned himself a savior, who came looking to
inspire the better angels of Europe’s nature. May fashions herself a
political survivor, who came looking for saviors. Wilson’s negotiations
lasted six months and resulted in a multitude of peace agreements, but
much of what the parties accomplished only led to future wars,
including conflicts in the Middle East and World War II. May’s
conversations, in contrast, lasted only a few hours and achieved close to
nothing, although we might one day credit the EU’s intransigence for
having safeguarded a hard-fought and historic peace, Northern
Ireland’s Good Friday Agreement.
Despite these stark differences, the similarities between how things
turned out for Wilson and how they are going for May deserve
consideration; it may not be too late for Prime Minister May to learn
from how and why Wilson’s otherwise remarkable journey ended in
bitter disappointment. While Wilson did not get everything he sought in
his negotiations with his European allies — for example, he failed to
convince the French to impose a less punitive peace on the Germans —
the failure that took the greatest toll on his legacy (not to mention his
health) was domestic, not foreign.
What Wilson had wanted most in 1919 was for the creation of a strong
and enduring League of Nations that would replace the world’s reliance
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What Theresa May Might Learn From Woodrow Wilson’s Failed…
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

on “balance of power” geopolitical calculations to maintain peace (a
practice that had failed in spectacular fashion in 1914). Wilson hoped
that structures and institutions based on the principle of “collective
security” would herald an era of more stable peace.  Europeans were
almost uniformly skeptical of Wilson’s vision, but eventually acceded to
Wilson’s demands for the creation of a League of Nations.
Unfortunately, Wilson was far less successful with his fellow Americans,
who rejected his calls for the United States to join the League.
We might endlessly wonder whether American involvement in the
League of Nations would have changed the course of world history, or
whether the catastrophes of the ensuing decades were inevitable. What
requires less endurance is an analysis of why we never had a chance to
find out.
President Wilson failed for many of the same reasons Prime Minister
May is struggling today. Like Wilson, May managed to conclude a Brexit
agreement with the European Union, but she has struggled mightily
with winning support for this deal at home.  When UK citizens voted to
leave the European Union two years ago, it was in the context of an
aggressive “Leave” campaign based on, in my view, unrealistic
promises, strategic misrepresentations, and some outright lies. The
British people were assured, in essence, that a final Brexit agreement
would give them all of the economic benefits that they currently enjoy
as EU members, but without having to accept any of the unpopular
elements of EU membership (e.g., the free movement of people or
regulations). As I have explained elsewhere (see here and here), an
analysis of each side’s constraints and relative leverage made clear that
this was never going to be possible.
The agreement Theresa May actually reached with her European
counterparts falls well short of what was promised, and it has elements
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What Theresa May Might Learn From Woodrow Wilson’s Failed…
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

(e.g., the “Northern Ireland backstop” provision) that the EU deems
imperative and Brexit supporters find odious. Hence, the current
impasse – and the growing possibility of a potentially disastrous “no
deal” Brexit, in which the UK leaves the EU without any agreement at all
to safeguard mutual economic, strategic, and geopolitical interests.
As May tries to negotiate the Brexit endgame, she might well consider
three lessons from Wilson’s futile diplomacy during his last year in
office.
Manage expectations and build support on your side of the table
from the very start
Like May, Wilson focused all of his attention on negotiating with the
Europeans and failed to manage expectations or build support at home.
This made it easy for Republicans, who opposed international influence
over American foreign policy, to build a strong case against the League.
By the time Wilson finally decided to travel across the U.S. to sell his
message, opposition to his proposal had hardened, his health had
weakened, and time was running out.
Theresa May faces a similar problem of her own making. By repeating,
for almost two years, the unrealistic positions and false promises of the
hardline Brexiteers, May perpetuated false hope in the UK about the
kind of deal she would be able to negotiate with Europe. Not
surprisingly, she now finds herself in a Wilsonian bind: the British
people do not understand or like what they see, political opposition has
hardened, and time is running out.
To be effective, threats must be credible and meaningful
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What Theresa May Might Learn From Woodrow Wilson’s Failed…
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Like May, Wilson misplayed his hand because he seems to have
misunderstood what makes a threat effective. First, threats needs to be
credible — i.e., the other side needs to believe what you say. Second,
threats needs to be meaningful — i.e., the other side needs to care about
the consequences of what is threatened. Wilson warned his fellow
Americans that rejecting the League of Nations would increase the risk
of another massive European or worldwide war that Americans would
again need to fight. This might have been true, but it was too theoretical
and too distant a possibility, and hence easily dismissed. More pressing
for many Americans, and especially the Republican “irreconcilables”
(the label given to those who were categorically opposed to Wilson’s
treaty), was the concern that joining the League might entangle the U.S.
in unnecessary conflicts.
Similarly, May has been trying to motivate Members of Parliament
(MPs) to vote for her Brexit deal with precisely the wrong threat. She
warns that a refusal to back her deal will lead to a “no deal” Brexit,
which most experts (and this author) believe would be especially
disastrous for the UK. This threat, while credible, is not meaningful:
polls show that most Conservative MPs actually prefer a no-deal Brexit
to the agreement May has negotiated. It is hard to threaten people with
an outcome they actually prefer. A more effective threat would be for
May to say that if parliament rejects her deal she will back a second
referendum on Brexit (which could result in the UK remaining in the
EU).  As even May knows, if push comes to shove, a second referendum
is a better outcome for the UK than a no-deal Brexit. More importantly
for May, this threat also motivates Conservative MPs to votes in favor of
her deal, because a second referendum is the outcome they fear most, by
far.
Don’t escalate commitment to a failing strategy
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What Theresa May Might Learn From Woodrow Wilson’s Failed…
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Like May, Wilson failed to change his strategy even after a resounding
political defeat. In November 1919, the U.S. Senate voted against the
Treaty of Versailles, largely due to Wilson’s unwillingness to revise any
provisions related to the League of Nations. He would get an
opportunity for a second vote, which meant that in the weeks and
months to follow, Wilson faced a choice: build a bipartisan coalition
with Republicans who had reservations about the treaty but were not
categorically opposed to it, or double down on a failing course of action.
 Wilson chose the latter, and a second vote on the same treaty in March
1920 led to a final defeat for the idea of American involvement in the
League of Nations.
Theresa May has now matched Wilson with her own two failed attempts
in parliament, and is poised to add another when she returns for a third
and (likely) final vote in mid-February. It is not too late to discard her
failed strategy and to try something different — e.g., threaten a second
referendum or build a cross-party coalition with elements of the Labor
party who are open to a more moderate version of Brexit — but so far,
she has signaled no willingness to do so.
As I emphasize in my most recent book, Negotiating the Impossible,
effective negotiators pay attention to the interests and perspectives of
all parties that can influence a deal — not just those who are sitting
across the table from them. Both Wilson and May were so fixated on
their own interests, and on extracting concessions from their European
counterparts, that they failed to appreciate the importance of
negotiating appropriately with their own side. At least for May, it is still
not too late to learn this lesson. She cannot go back in time to manage
expectations or build support for her deal, but she can discard her
failing strategy and try something different that maximizes the
likelihood of success given limited time and options.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What Theresa May Might Learn From Woodrow Wilson’s Failed…
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
6
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Almost no one believes that Prime Minister May actually thinks a no-
deal Brexit would be better for the UK than a second public referendum,
but in order to appease the Brexiteers who put her in power—and to
remain consistent with her earlier statements rejecting a new vote—she
has so far refused to back a second referendum. As we approach the
Brexit endgame, however, this approach no longer represents just a
disappointing failure of leadership, but also a striking failure of strategy.
If May announces that she will support a second referendum unless
parliament supports her deal, she not only avoids disaster in the event
negotiations fail, she also increases the likelihood that negotiations
succeed.
In his essay entitled Self-Reliance, Ralph Waldo Emerson wrote: “A
foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds, adored by little
statesmen and philosophers and divines. With consistency a great soul
has simply nothing to do.” Prime Minister May never claimed to be a
philosopher or divine, but her actions in the coming weeks will
determine the kind of stateswoman that history will judge her to have
been. For the good of her country, it is time for May to stop escalating
commitment to a failing strategy and to shed the constraints of a foolish
consistency. Admittedly, it is never easy to concede failure and to
change course—especially in the realm of politics. Then again, when it
comes to leadership and moral courage, nothing that is truly worth
doing is ever easy.
Deepak Malhotra is the Eli Goldston Professor of Business
Administration at Harvard Business School and the author of
Negotiating the Impossible. Connect with him on
Twitter: @Prof_Malhotra.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What Theresa May Might Learn From Woodrow Wilson’s Failed…
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
7
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
