REPRINT R2004E
PUBLISHED IN HBR
JULY–AUGUST 2020
ARTICLE
NEGOTIATION
What’s Your 
Negotiation Strategy?
Here’s how to avoid reactive dealmaking 
by Jonathan Hughes and Danny Ertel 
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

What’s Your Negotiation  
AUTHORS
Jonathan Hughes 
Partner, Vantage Partners
Danny Ertel 
Partner, Vantage Partners
2
Harvard Business Review
July–August 2020
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Here’s how to avoid 
reactive dealmaking
  Strategy?
NEGOTIATION
PHOTOGRAPHER JEFF MINTON
FOR ARTICLE REPRINTS CALL 800-988-0886 OR 617-783-7500, OR VISIT HBR.ORG
Harvard Business Review
July–August 2020  3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Most reply that they’ll do some planning before engaging 
with their counterparts—for instance, by identifying each 
side’s best alternative to a negotiated agreement (BATNA) or 
by researching the other party’s key interests. But beyond 
that, they feel limited in how well they can prepare. What we 
hear most often is “It depends on what the other side does.”
Fair enough. For most routine negotiations, a reactive 
approach is sufficient. When the stakes are low, skilled nego-
tiators can pivot with relative ease from one tactic to another 
as the opposite side makes moves, and often that’s enough to 
ensure that the final deal fully captures value for them. But 
from time to time dealmakers find themselves in complex 
negotiations with higher stakes. In those situations they 
require a much more robust approach. Just like business, 
political, and military leaders, negotiators need a strategic 
framework that illuminates the key choices they must make 
to achieve their ultimate objectives.
In the 30 years we’ve spent as advisers on hundreds of 
negotiations, ranging from agreements to resolve armed  
conflict to multibillion-dollar commercial deals, we have cod-
ified what makes negotiation strategies effective. Ne­go­tiators 
should start developing them well before the initiation of 
talks, but the process is dynamic and iterative and should 
continue until the final deal is inked—and in some cases 
beyond. With well-thought-out strategies, negotiators 
can suppress the urge to react to counterparts or to make 
preemptive moves that are based on fears about the other 
side’s intentions. They’ll be able to prepare for the worst but 
not trigger it—and to identify the actions most likely to have 
a significant impact on deal outcomes.
Here are the key strategic principles negotiators should 
apply to their next complex deal.
RETHINK COUNTERPARTS
People tend to pursue deals with the obvious parties. If 
we’re sellers, we search for a buyer; if we’re borrowers, we 
search for a lender. But we often overlook many others in the 
ecosystem surrounding the negotiation: our competitors, 
suppliers, and customers—and their competitors, suppliers, 
and customers. We need an approach that encompasses all 
the parties that can and will help us fulfill our objectives.
To devise one, negotiators should answer the following 
questions:
1. What business outcomes do we seek through this 
negotiation?
2. Who cares about those outcomes?
3. Who can do something to bring about those outcomes?
4. How can we engage, directly or indirectly, with parties 
that share some of our interest in achieving those outcomes?
Consider how the holder of key patents necessary to 
play movies and music on DVDs sought to prevent low-cost 
manufacturers in China from infringing on its intellectual 
property (and competing unfairly with its duly licensed part-
ners). Initially, it tried to negotiate with those manufacturers, 
but in most cases it was simply ignored. And even when the 
Chinese manufacturers were successfully challenged and 
subjected to a legal process, they would simply close shop 
and then reopen under a different name.
Working backward from the desired outcome (halting 
sales of infringing products in significant markets), the 
patent holder realized that although it couldn’t dissuade 
manufacturers from making unlicensed DVD players, it could 
persuade large importers and distributors to stop buying and 
When we advise our 
clients on negotiations, 
we often ask them how 
they intend to formulate 
a negotiation strategy.
NEGOTIATION
COPYRIGHT © 2020 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
4
Harvard Business Review
July–August 2020
4
Harvard Business Review
July–August 2020
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

THE PAYOFF
Tactical negotiating can lock parties into a zero-sum 
posture, in which the goal is to capture as much value 
from the other side as possible. Well-thought-out 
strategies suppress the urge to react to moves or to 
take preemptive action based on fears about the other 
side’s intentions. They lead to deals that maximize 
value for both sides.
IDEA IN BRIEF
THE CHALLENGE
Negotiators often 
mainly react to 
the other side’s 
moves. But for 
complex deals, a 
proactive approach 
is needed.
THE STRATEGY
Strategic negotiators look beyond their 
immediate counterpart for stakeholders 
who can influence the deal. They 
intentionally control the scope and 
timing of talks, search for novel sources 
of leverage, and seek connections across 
multiple deals.
and plant. The authority to negotiate contracts is usually 
(though not always) delegated accordingly. Carefully parsing 
a counterpart’s constituencies is essential to understanding 
negotiation leverage.
The supply chain team at a large hospitality and entertain-
ment company took that lesson to heart in negotiations with 
major beverage suppliers. The team members recognized 
that bargaining with their sales counterparts over volume 
discounts would achieve limited value. It was only by broad-
ening the discussion well beyond discounts and the purview 
of sales that they learned that other stakeholders within their 
suppliers had much more value to contribute. There were 
also opportunities to discuss promotional sponsorships at 
the entertainment company’s venues and events, the strong 
relationships the beverage suppliers had with performers 
who could fill those venues, marketing events that the sup-
pliers could host at the entertainment company’s hospitality 
properties, and more.
RETHINK THE DEAL’S SCOPE
The vast majority of negotiators take the fundamental 
scope of a deal as a given. They may consider a limited set of 
choices—for instance, shorter- versus longer-term deals—
but by and large their tactics are guided by a comparison 
between their BATNA and how close to some preferred 
outcome they think they can get. As the entertainment 
company’s example illustrates, however, there are often 
significant opportunities to change the scope of negotiations 
and achieve much better results.
The vast majority of negotiators take the fundamental scope of a deal as a given, but  
there are often significant opportunities to change it and achieve much better results.
selling those products. By helping the importers and distribu-
tors recognize the infringement and intellectual property 
issues, the patent owner got them on the same side of what 
would otherwise have been a steep uphill negotiation with 
the unauthorized manufacturers.
ANALYZE COUNTERPARTS’ CONSTITUENCIES
In high-stakes negotiations, dealmakers tend to talk about 
how much power and leverage the other side has, what 
the other side will or won’t agree to, and how to influence 
its behavior. While viewing counterparts as if they were 
one monolithic entity is convenient, that attitude regularly 
leads to analytical and strategic missteps. (In the realm of 
international diplomacy, negotiators have traditionally been 
somewhat more attuned to thinking about how to influence 
multiple constituencies when forging deals—be it with the 
Taliban or the old Soviet Union.)
For example, a customer might perceive itself to be at a 
disadvantage in a negotiation with an important supplier 
because it represents only a small piece of that supplier’s 
overall business. A closer look, however, might reveal that it 
accounts for a fairly large percentage of the business at one 
of that supplier’s plants or in a specific geographic market 
for a particular unit. Though the supplier’s corporate leaders 
might view the customer as insignificant, the plant manager 
or unit head who depends on it would see it as critical. A 
corporation isn’t one uniform organization; it’s a federation 
of businesses. Most often, profits and losses are assessed not 
only at the enterprise level but by unit, geography, product, 
FOR ARTICLE REPRINTS CALL 800-988-0886 OR 617-783-7500, OR VISIT HBR.ORG
Harvard Business Review
July–August 2020  5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Consider a health care firm that was seeking to renegotiate 
the terms of a major supply contract with a pharmaceutical 
company. The health care firm needed much more manu-
facturing capacity from a major plant owned and operated 
by the pharma company. The pharma company was loath 
to offer more capacity than the original contract specified, 
because it anticipated needing to make more of its own 
products at the same facility in the future. Many creative 
options were explored, including shared capital investments 
to increase the plant’s efficiency and output, altered financial 
terms, and the possibility of a “plant within a plant” operat-
ing model. Nonetheless, no solution appeared to meet both 
sides’ needs.
However, when the scope of the negotiation was 
increased beyond altering the existing agreement, and both 
sides stepped back to reevaluate (and share information on) 
their respective global operations (including plans for build-
ing new plants) and growth objectives (and associated capital 
investment needs), they were able to reach an agreement. 
The new contract rebalanced production and supply across 
multiple plants and delivered substantially more value to 
both parties. The negotiators didn’t expand just the pie; they 
expanded the entire menu.
Or take the financial services firm that was seeking to 
renew a contract with a company that owned proprietary 
data assets and was demanding a hefty price increase. An 
analysis of the annual report and earnings calls of the data 
company showed that it was focused on increasing revenue 
from other products and services—ones the financial services 
firm was purchasing from several other suppliers. While 
some of those current suppliers were highly valued partners, 
and it didn’t make sense to contemplate shifting business 
away from them, in other cases the financial firm could 
give the data provider an increase in business in the areas it 
wanted to build. The firm’s negotiating team offered to do 
that—but only if the provider agreed to more-reasonable 
terms on the data it enjoyed a de facto monopoly on.
It’s worth noting how counterintuitive this approach is. 
When confronted with opposing parties who seem to have 
more leverage, the natural tendency is to look for ways to 
weaken that leverage—to find walkaway alternatives and 
issue threats. Such attempts often come up short or under-
mine deal success. The lesson here is to offer the other side 
NEGOTIATION
ABOUT THE ART
Photographer Jeff Minton captured the salespeople 
at a car dealership in Levittown, New York, hustling 
to meet their monthly quotas.
6
Harvard Business Review
July–August 2020
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

new opportunities instead of focusing just on the needs that 
only it can meet for you.
Sometimes the right strategy is even to reduce the scope of 
the deal. A classic piece of negotiation advice is to carefully 
evaluate (and seek to improve) your BATNA. The problem 
is, in most high-stakes negotiations, there’s really no viable 
alternative to some deal with the other party. Digging deeper 
into BATNA analysis is vital in such scenarios. The key is not 
to simply consider wholesale alternatives to any agreement 
with a powerful counterpart but rather to explore alternatives 
to some elements of what you’re seeking through that deal.
Here’s how that approach worked for a medical device 
company that felt powerless in its negotiations with a 
distributor that dominated an important regional market. 
No other distributor had comparable coverage in the region. 
After considering expanding the scope of the deal, the device 
maker instead opted to narrow it. It identified alternative dis-
tribution channels for some of its products in some segments 
of the regional market. Bringing its products to market with 
a portfolio of smaller distributors would have been prohibi-
tively complex and would have increased costs and reduced 
revenue. But once the device maker had defined a strategy to 
narrow the scope of the deal with the incumbent distributor, 
the negotiations moved to a considerably more even footing.
In fact, the distributor stopped making demands and 
threats and became willing to engage in a collaborative 
process. The two sides jointly evaluated where it was espe-
cially costly for the distributor to service the device maker 
(business the distributor was actually happy to give up) and 
where it would have been most difficult for the device maker 
to move to alternative distributors. The narrower scope made 
the distributor willing to reduce some of its requirements 
(meant to cover the costs of distributing low-margin products 
in expensive-to-service segments). For the device maker, the 
cost of agreeing to much of what the distributor was request-
ing dropped significantly.
RETHINK THE NATURE OF LEVERAGE
All too often dealmakers conflate negotiation power with a 
strong BATNA and the concomitant ability to hurt the other 
party. Essentially, the message they send is: We don’t need 
a deal with you, and you need a deal with us, so we get to 
dictate the terms. Such a mindset leads to pressure tactics. It 
also makes negotiators who lack attractive walkaway alterna-
tives conclude that they have no power, which in turn causes 
miscalculations and unwarranted concessions. Moreover, 
their sense of powerlessness can breed fear and resentment—
negative emotions that hamper creative thinking about 
potential avenues to an optimal outcome.
The solution is think beyond walkaway alternatives and 
consider multiple sources of not only coercive leverage but 
also positive leverage. By positive leverage, we mean things 
negotiators can uniquely offer to make the other side desire  
a deal rather than fear the absence of one.
Many technology firms have IP teams that seek to 
persuade consumer electronics companies such as Apple, 
Sony, and LG to pay for licenses. The negotiation of IP rights 
in this market is dauntingly complex. Patent infringement 
is pervasive—though often unintentional. Legitimate 
efforts to collect royalties are vastly complicated by the 
well-known phenomenon of patent trolls. As a result, most 
IP licensing teams struggle to “move up in the queue” for 
simple consideration by underresourced in-licensing teams, 
who feel besieged by all the parties claiming the right to 
royalties—and offering little in return except an agreement 
not to sue.
The IP licensing team at one well-known tech firm had a 
strong claims portfolio and compelling market data about 
the rights that other companies were infringing. The team 
tried to be creative and flexible, offering to blend payments 
for past infringement, ongoing royalties, and cross-licenses. 
However, its BATNA—filing lawsuits against infringers that 
ignored it—wasn’t strong, because the ability to enforce 
patent rights and collect damages had been hampered in 
recent years in many jurisdictions around the world. The firm 
didn’t have a particularly good track rec­ord in court, either. 
To various consumer electronics companies, it made sense to 
rebuff the team’s demands. And so they did.
By researching the business models and strategies of  
the electronics companies, the team was able to pinpoint 
which of its firm’s patented technologies were comple-
mentary to important initiatives at each target licensee. 
Working with the firm’s tech and sales departments, the 
team then defined value propositions showing each target 
licensee how it could use the firm’s IP to generate new 
Consider not only coercive leverage but also positive leverage—things you can uniquely 
offer to make the other side desire a deal rather than fear the absence of one.
FOR ARTICLE REPRINTS CALL 800-988-0886 OR 617-783-7500, OR VISIT HBR.ORG
Harvard Business Review
July–August 2020  7
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

products or revenue streams. One electronics company, for 
example, could leverage the tech firm’s sound and imaging IP 
in elder-care offerings, and another could enhance its device 
with the firm’s virtual reality expertise. Those opportunities 
made it worthwhile for the electronics companies to engage 
in meaningful negotiations with the team. Though this strat-
egy required a lot of time and effort, the payoff was worth it.
LOOK FOR LINKS ACROSS NEGOTIATIONS
Most negotiators focus exclusively on maximizing the value 
of the deal at hand. In doing so, they often undermine the 
success of future negotiations—their own and those of 
their colleagues. A strategic approach requires considering 
success beyond the current deal and, in particular, how the 
precedents it sets will create anchors and shape dynamics 
in future negotiations. After all, except with pure sales and 
purchases of assets, most high-stakes business negotiations 
are repeat transactions undertaken in the context of long-
term relationships.
Analyzing links across multiple negotiations can unearth 
hidden forms of leverage. Consider the case of a global 
semiconductor company that felt continually squeezed by 
unreasonable price increases from OEM component sup-
pliers. A major problem was that negotiations over initial 
licensing or codevelopment of technology for new products 
were conducted by one group, whereas subsequent contract 
negotiations (with the same suppliers, but occurring years 
Think about success beyond the current deal and, in particular, how the precedents 
it sets will create anchors and shape dynamics in future negotiations.
8
Harvard Business Review
July–August 2020
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

CONSIDER THE IMPACT OF TIMING AND SEQUENCING
Many people seek to speed up or slow down negotiations 
to put pressure on the other side and extract concessions. 
But pressure tactics often backfire. Careful consideration of 
how the other side is likely to respond should guide when to 
accelerate, slow down, or pause a negotiation.
Several years ago a small technology company was in 
negotiations to renew a critical deal with an internet behe-
moth. The small company depended a lot on the revenue the 
deal produced, and the thought of going without it for even 
a short time was frightening. Seeking to pressure the small 
firm, the behemoth showed little urgency to complete the 
deal and signaled that it wasn’t sure the contract was worth 
renewing.
That turned out to be a major miscalculation. Recognizing 
that it could do little to get the other side to go faster, the 
small company’s negotiation team decided to make use of 
the time to build support within the firm’s ecosystem of 
customers and business partners for the possibility of part-
nering with one of the behemoth’s giant competitors instead. 
That time was well spent. As such an alternative went from 
unimaginable to conceivable to plausible, the smaller firm’s 
leverage grew. In the end the contract with the behemoth 
was renewed for a nine-figure value that represented a nearly 
five-fold increase over the expiring deal. While the passage 
of time did make the small firm nervous about its dwindling 
cash reserves, it also gave it the opportunity to substantially 
alter the landscape in which the negotiation took place.
Choreographing the sequence in which you address issues 
or engage different players is also important. Resolving some 
issues may reset the stakes or reframe the remainder of the 
negotiation.
A good example of strategically rethinking sequence in a 
negotiation comes from the oil and gas industry. As part of 
a joint venture deal with a national oil company, one large 
multinational had agreed that if a particular competitor 
wanted to add itself to the deal later, it could do so by paying 
its share of the capital plus interest for the time it hadn’t par-
ticipated. A few years later that second multinational indeed 
triggered its option and sought to open negotiations on the 
rate of interest. Instead of discussing how many points above 
or below LIBOR would be appropriate, the multinational 
NEGOTIATION
later) were handled by another group, with relatively little 
coordination between the two. Meanwhile, negotiations with 
those suppliers and other third parties for maintenance and 
repair services and spare parts were handled by yet another 
group, and all three kinds of negotiations occurred on differ-
ent timetables.
By looking at these separate but related negotiations 
holistically, the semiconductor company was able to alter 
the power dynamics. Teams negotiating supply agreements 
acknowledged that they had little choice but to accept an 
incumbent supplier’s pricing and terms but were able to 
point to upcoming product introductions and warn that 
unreasonable positions held now would most likely exclude 
suppliers from being considered for next-generation prod-
ucts—and all associated downstream revenue. They also 
shared data about maintenance and repair revenue streams 
and their growing ability to redirect such business to partners 
who demonstrated reasonableness and good faith.
Threats and promises about future business had been 
made in the past by the company’s negotiators, but they 
weren’t specific and lacked credibility. Now the benefits of 
increased cooperation and the potential loss of opportunities 
were tangible to suppliers—and hence persuasive.
HOW TO PRESSURE-TEST 
YOUR STRATEGY
One key to negotiation strategy is putting yourself in the 
shoes of your counterparts and truly understanding their 
motivations and likely actions. The best approach is to 
formally charter a team to analyze the negotiation from the 
other party’s point of view—a so-called Red Team. (During 
the Cold War, Red Teams played the role of the Soviet Union 
in war-gaming simulations.)
Of course, most negotiation planning involves analyzing 
the goals and likely actions of the other side. In our 
experience, however, failures of imagination and inevitable 
human bias tend to limit and distort such efforts. Especially 
when the stakes are high and power imbalances create fear 
and resentment, strong emotions stunt thinking and warp 
rational analysis. We’ve also found that unless the Red Team 
includes senior or highly respected and influential members, 
the insights that can be drawn from war-gaming are often 
discounted.
In some cases, simulations might be done as part of 
strategy development and negotiation planning. But it’s 
even more effective to do them throughout the negotiation 
process, having the Red Team revise its strategy as events 
unfold and using ongoing simulations to anticipate actions 
by the other side.
FOR ARTICLE REPRINTS CALL 800-988-0886 OR 617-783-7500, OR VISIT HBR.ORG
Harvard Business Review
July–August 2020  9
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

decided to go back to the oil company and negotiate what 
further terms should apply to the revised deal. The multina-
tional proposed the principle that a later entrant shouldn’t 
earn a higher rate of return than the original partners, who 
had taken a greater risk before the proj­ect had proved its 
value. The oil company readily agreed.
With that matter settled, the multinational turned to the 
new partner-to-be and demonstrated, using the recently 
audited books for the joint venture, that the interest owed 
by an incoming partner would have to be 60% a year, not 
anything like LIBOR. After some initial shock, the incoming 
partner agreed.
Five questions can help negotiators strategically manage 
timing and sequencing:
1. What changes in the external marketplace might increase 
or decrease the value or importance of the deal for each party?
2. To what extent can we use additional time to strengthen 
our walkaway alternatives?
3. To what extent can the other side use additional time to 
strengthen its walkaway alternatives?
4. How might deals negotiated with other parties affect the 
scope of the negotiation or create precedents that influence  
the way we resolve key issues?
5. What events or changes in the external marketplace 
might adversely affect the strength of our walkaway alter-
natives—and the other side’s—or create mutually beneficial 
opportunities?
BE CREATIVE ABOUT THE PROCESS AND FRAMING
When approaching a high-stakes deal with a powerful 
counterpart, many negotiators debate whether to start by 
issuing their own proposal or by asking the other side to do 
so. They also often wonder whether they should pro​ject 
strength by asking for aggressive terms in their first offer 
or counteroffer, or signal a desire for a win-win outcome 
through more-balanced and reasonable terms. But such 
binary thinking blinds us to the many ways we might shape 
the negotiation process to reduce risk and increase the 
likelihood of a great outcome.
Let’s look at a global health care company that depended 
on a single supplier to make one of its biggest revenue- 
generating products. The supplier held numerous patents 
essential to the manufacturing process, so switching to a dif-
ferent one would have taken years and major investments in 
redesign. But for many years the supplier had been unwilling 
to collaborate on improving quality and manufacturing effi-
ciency. As the contract with it neared expiration, the health 
care company pondered how to open the negotiation for a 
renewal. Should it demand big price reductions and other 
improvements? Or should it begin with more-reasonable 
terms and hope that the supplier responded in kind?
After much debate about the trade-offs, the health care 
company developed a third approach. Rather than beginning 
by sending an initial term sheet, it invited the supplier to 
a prenegotiation summit—a joint discussion of what had 
worked well, and what hadn’t, for each side under the prior 
contract and of how the market and each side’s business 
objectives had changed. This was deemed a low-risk move. 
The supplier might well decline the offer, but so what? The 
health care company’s negotiation team would then simply 
revert to sending an opening term sheet.
NEGOTIATION
Focus on the deal terms
Respond to the other  
side’s actions
Maximize pressure on  
the other side
Treat every negotiation  
as discrete
Look for ways to get the 
maximum share of deal value
Engage with all stake- 
holders at the counterpart  
as if they’re aligned
Focus on shaping the negotiation 
context and process
Anticipate and influence the  
other side’s actions
Employ both positive and (when 
necessary) coercive leverage
Analyze and leverage connections 
across negotiations
Consider if and how to significantly 
alter the scope of the deal
Consider different constituencies 
within the counterpart and how 
their divergence or alignment may 
affect the negotiation
A Reactive Approach to 
Negotiations
A Strategic Approach to 
Negotiations
10
Harvard Business Review
July–August 2020
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

To the surprise of some on the team, the supplier 
accepted the invitation. During the summit the health 
care company’s team shared an analysis of the economics 
and evolving market position of the company’s product. 
It showed that unless the product’s price fell significantly, 
new competitive offerings would take substantial market 
share away from it. That would reduce not only the health 
care company’s revenue but also the supplier’s. The analysis 
triggered an animated discussion focused not on bargaining 
but on joint problem-solving. That in turn led to thinking 
about how to creatively restructure the way the companies 
worked together and to a set of principles for negotiating 
commercial terms in the new contract, including a frame-
work for sharing risks and rewards. The ultimate deal saved 
the manufacturer tens of millions of dollars but was viewed 
by the supplier as more favorable than the earlier contract. 
Both sides agreed that a traditional “offer-counteroffer” 
negotiation process would at best have yielded a signifi-
cantly less valuable deal for both—and could easily have 
resulted in no deal at all.
HIGH-STAKES NEGOTIATIONS TEND to produce a lot of  
anxiety. This leads dealmakers to focus on (perceived) threats 
rather than identify all possible forms of leverage and think 
expansively about options. When that happens, negotiators 
are more likely to make poor tactical choices, either giving in 
to pressure from the other side or inadvertently causing their 
own worst fears to come to pass.
A strategic negotiation approach involves more than 
choosing a cooperative or competitive posture, and thinking 
in such binary terms is almost always counterproductive. 
Assessing connections between one negotiation and others 
with the same party over time (and even with other parties), 
taking a hard look at whether they’re negotiating about the 
right things, and focusing on when and how to most effec-
tively engage with the other side will unlock far more value 
for dealmakers. 

HBR Reprint R2004E
JONATHAN HUGHES and DANNY ERTEL are partners at  
Vantage Partners, a global consultancy specializing in strategic 
partnerships and complex negotiations.
A strategic negotiation approach involves more than choosing a cooperative or competitive 
posture, and thinking in such binary terms is almost always counterproductive.
FOR ARTICLE REPRINTS CALL 800-988-0886 OR 617-783-7500, OR VISIT HBR.ORG
Harvard Business Review
July–August 2020  11
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
