Digital
Article
Strategy & Execution
What’s the Best Way to
Give Ground in a
Negotiation?
by Kian Siong Tey, Michael Schaerer, Nikhil Madan,
and Roderick Swaab
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

What’s the Best Way to Give
Ground in a Negotiation?
by Kian Siong Tey, Michael Schaerer, Nikhil Madan,
and Roderick Swaab
Published on HBR.org  /  October 20, 2021  /  Reprint H06NIW
MirageC/Getty Images
In zero-sum negotiations — such as bargaining over the price of a
product, haggling over rent, or negotiating the price of antique — a key
challenge is figuring out just how much to change your offer at each
round of the negotiation. Give away too much and you devalue your
offer; give away too little and you risk getting stuck in an impasse. The
situation is complicated by the many meanings that the amounts of
these concessions can signal: That a negotiator wants to settle quickly,
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What’s the Best Way to Give Ground in a Negotiation?
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

or that they lack ambition, or maybe that they want to encourage
reciprocity.
Our recent research set out to understand how negotiators respond to
these signals and thus to find the most beneficial approach for offering
concessions.
Typically, negotiators offer concessions by reducing their price the
exact same amount across rounds — $50 each time, say. But 6% of the
experienced negotiators in our survey took an alternative approach of
tapering their concessions — in other words, making concessions
smaller each round: $100 the first round, then $60, then $30, and so on.
Ultimately our research showed that this exact approach can help
negotiators extract more value.
Tapering Concessions Works
To determine the benefits of tapering concessions, we conducted a
study in which we told participants — MBA students of diverse
nationalities — that they were looking to rent a one-bedroom apartment
in the city center and that the monthly rent for similar apartments in
nearby suburban areas lay between $700-$1,000. We asked them to
negotiate the rent of a suitable apartment that was advertised by a
landlord at $1,500.
We simulated the landlord with a bot that made either constant or
decreasing concessions over three rounds of negotiation. Half of the
students received counteroffers that were $100 cheaper every time
($1,400, $1,300, $1,200). The other half received counteroffers in a
tapering pattern ($1,300, $1,225 and $1,200). The negotiation ended
automatically when participants accepted or made an offer higher than
the landlord’s counteroffer.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What’s the Best Way to Give Ground in a Negotiation?
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

In each case the landlord’s last offer was $1,200, but we found that the
average last offer of participants who received constant concessions was
lower than that of the participants who had been offered tapered
concessions — $879 versus $811. The implication is that by decreasing
the size of concessions negotiators offer, they can obtain more attractive
deals because their counterparts are willing to pay more.
Single Concessions, Not So Much
To determine whether tapering multiple concessions is more effective
than making just one concession, we conducted another study in which
we asked executive MBA students, also of diverse nationalities, to
negotiate over email the signing bonus of an otherwise agreed-upon job
offer. Participants either took the role of the recruiter or the candidate
and negotiated with each other to find an agreement. All recruiters were
instructed to make the same first offer of $20,000. For half the pairs,
recruiters were instructed to increase that offer by $2,000, then $750,
and then $250, resulting in a final offer of $23,000. In the other half,
recruiters made just one concession, immediately increasing the offer to
$23,000.
Here again, we found a sizable difference in the counterparts’ average
final offers. Candidates who had received tapering concessions
proposed to settle at $23,650 on average, while candidates who had
received no such cues were a lot more ambitious with a final
counteroffer of $28,161. In other words, recruiters who tapered their
concessions on average ended up spending about $4,500 less to hire the
candidate than did recruiters who made a single concession.
How Big Should the Difference Be?
We then conducted a third study to get a more precise sense of the most
effective rate at which a negotiator should taper concessions. We found
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What’s the Best Way to Give Ground in a Negotiation?
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

that the tapering effect worked best when applied at a moderate pace.
To test this, participants negotiated the purchase of a $1,500 second-
hand laptop with a simulated seller. Some negotiators received three
concessions of the same amount from the seller. Other negotiators
received three decreasing concessions, but at various paces.
Participants made the highest average offer ($975) when the seller
offered decreasing concessions at a moderate pace, as opposed to
tapering concessions slowly ($957) or going with a very large first
concession followed by a series of small ones ($937). Keeping concession
size constant in each round led to the worst outcome for the seller, as
the buyers’ final offer only amounted to $909 on average.
This implies that negotiators need to decrease concessions substantially
enough each round for the counterparty to take notice — your
counterpart needs to realize that your concessions are getting smaller
from round to round — but not so much as to make your original price
seem like a fluke followed by tiny manipulative concessions.
Negotiators who intend to taper their concessions should research their
market to get an understanding of what “large” or “small” concessions
would look like.
Signal Your Bottom Line
Why does the tapered concession approach work? Our studies show that
by shrinking the size of each successive concession negotiators signal to
their counterpart that they are reaching their bottom line (whether that
bottom line is real or not). Because counterparties are attuned to such
cues, it compels them to lower their ambition and give in to prevent an
impasse.
We also found that it works even better when you explicitly tell your
counterparty that you are reaching your bottom line. In a separate
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What’s the Best Way to Give Ground in a Negotiation?
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

study, we demonstrated this effect in a rent negotiation where the
landlord was again simulated by a bot. When the simulated landlord
tapered their concessions and mentioned they were reaching their
bottom line, participants made an even higher average offer than when
the simulated landlord only tapered their concessions. This implies that
negotiators can attain even better outcomes when they accompany their
concessions with a statement such as “I’m reaching my limit here.”
Although negotiators can claim more value when they successively
reduce concessions, we caution negotiators to not use this at the
expense of sacrificing potential win-win solutions, which are often
achievable in negotiations in which multiple issues are involved,
additional issues can be added, or when there is an ongoing
relationship. Signaling your bottom line by tapering concessions might
detract negotiators’ focus from attaining mutually beneficial solutions.
Likewise, we advise negotiators against this approach when the market
is relatively transparent and parties’ bottom lines are easier to estimate
based on market research.
Many negotiators go into the room without a plan for how they’ll make
concessions. But the relative effectiveness of decreasing your
concessions over several rounds is testament to why you should always
plan your concessions prior to negotiating.
KT
Kian Siong Tey is a PhD candidate at INSEAD.
Michael Schaerer is an Assistant Professor of Organizational
Behavior and Human Resources at Singapore Management
University’s Lee Kong Chian School of Business.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What’s the Best Way to Give Ground in a Negotiation?
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

NM
Nikhil Madan is an assistant professor of organizational behavior at
the Indian School of Business.
RS
Roderick Swaab is a professor of organizational behavior at INSEAD
and the INSEAD Dutch Alumni Fellow in Leadership, Diversity, and
Governance.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What’s the Best Way to Give Ground in a Negotiation?
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
6
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
