Digital Article / Business Communication
Do Your Slides Pass the Glance 
Test?
ZargonDesign/Getty Images An audience can’t listen to your presentation and 
read detailed, text-heavy slides at the same time (not without missing key 
parts of your message, anyway). So make sure your slides pass what I call the 
glance test: People should be able to comprehend each one in about three 
seconds. Think of your slides […] by Nancy Duarte
Published on HBR.org  /  October 22, 2012  /  Reprint H009JJ
ZargonDesign/Getty Images
An audience can’t listen to your presentation and read detailed, text-
heavy slides at the same time (not without missing key parts of your 
message, anyway). So make sure your slides pass what I call the glance 
test: People should be able to comprehend each one in about three 
seconds.
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Think of your slides as billboards. When people drive, they only briefly
take their eyes off their main focus — the road — to process billboard 
information. Similarly, your audience should focus intently on what 
you’re saying, looking only briefly at your slides when you display them.
Keep It Simple 
Research shows that people learn more effectively from multimedia 
messages when they’re stripped of extraneous words, graphics, 
animation, and sounds. Lots of extras actually take away meaning 
because they become a distraction. They overtax the audience’s 
cognitive resources.
So when adding elements to your slides, have a good reason: Does the 
audience need to see your logo on each slide to remember who you work 
for? Does that blue swoosh add meaning? If not, leave it off. The same 
goes for text. Keep it short and easy to skim. Scale the type as large as 
possible so the people in the back of the room can see it.
It’s also important to stick to a consistent visual style in your slide 
deck. Select one typeface — two at most. Use the same color palette 
throughout (limit yourself to three complementary colors, plus a couple 
of neutral shades, like gray and pale blue). Photos should be taken by 
the same photographer or look as if they are. Illustrations should be 
done in the same style.
Consider the “before” slide below. It fails the glance test because it’s 
packed with text. It’s functioning like a teleprompter — which may help 
you remember what to cover but won’t make it easier for the audience to 
digest it.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Do Your Slides Pass the Glance Test?
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Instead, streamline the text and incorporate simple visual elements 
(and save teleprompter text for the “notes” field, which the audience 
can’t see). You’ll reinforce your message and make it easier for people to 
get what you’re saying. Here’s an “after” slide to illustrate:
Arrange Slide Elements with Care
Another way to help people process your visuals more quickly: Think 
like a designer when you arrange slide elements.
These five design principles will help you simplify your slides so they’ll 
pass the glance test:
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Do Your Slides Pass the Glance Test?
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Flow. You can direct people’s eyes to certain areas of a slide to 
emphasize important points. Here, for example, your eye takes in the 
cluster of grapes, then moves to the message about quality, and then 
focuses on one beautiful grape from the “yield”:
Contrast. Our eyes are drawn to things that stand out, so designers 
use contrast to focus attention. Create contrast through your elements’ 
size, shape, color, and proximity. In this example, a presenter compared 
cross-sections of skin and soil to show that tending to both requires an 
understanding of the microbiological activity beneath the surface. The 
blurred backgrounds set off the stark white illustrations for quick visual 
processing:
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Do Your Slides Pass the Glance Test?
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

White space. White space is the open space surrounding items of 
interest. Presenters are often tempted to fill it up with additional 
content that competes for attention. But including a healthy amount 
of white space sharpens viewers’ focus by isolating elements. In this 
example, if we’d paired the text with a larger or more detailed image, 
your eye wouldn’t know where to begin, and the quote would have lost 
its power:
Hierarchy. A clear visual hierarchy allows viewers to quickly ascertain a 
slide’s most important elements:
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Do Your Slides Pass the Glance Test?
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Unity. Slides with visual unity look as though the same person created 
them and make your message feel cohesive. You can achieve this 
through consistent type styles, color, image treatment, and element 
placement throughout the slide deck. Here’s a pair of slides to illustrate:
Presentation software gives us many shiny, seductive elements to work 
with. But there’s beauty and clarity in restraint. Use simple visuals that 
support your message, and you’ll free people up to really hear — and 
adopt — your ideas.
This is the third post in Nancy Duarte’s blog series on creating and 
delivering presentations, based on tips from her new book, the HBR Guide 
to Persuasive Presentations.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Do Your Slides Pass the Glance Test?
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
6
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Read the other posts here:
Post #1: How to Present to Senior Executives
Post #2: Create a Presentation Your Audience Will Care About
Post #4: Structure Your Presentation Like a Story
This article was originally published online on October 22, 2012.
ND
Nancy Duarte is a best-selling author with thirty years of CEO-ing 
under her belt. She’s driven her firm, Duarte, Inc., to be the global 
leader behind some of the most influential messages and visuals in 
business and culture. Duarte, Inc., is the largest design firm in Silicon 
Valley, as well as one of the top woman-owned businesses in the area. 
Nancy has written six best-selling books, four have won awards, and 
her new book, DataStory: Explain Data and Inspire Action Through 
Story, is available now. Follow Duarte on Twitter: @nancyduarte or 
LinkedIn.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Do Your Slides Pass the Glance Test?
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
7
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
