Digital 
Article
Business Communication
3 Group Presentation 
Pitfalls — and How to Avoid 
Them
Strategies for a polished, unified final product. by Allison Shapira
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

3 Group Presentation Pitfalls 
— and How to Avoid Them
Strategies for a polished, unified final product. by Allison Shapira
Published on HBR.org  /  November 22, 2021  /  Reprint H06PNM
Image Source/Getty Images
Many of us have experienced poor group presentations. If you’re giving 
one, it’s the last-minute scramble the night before to decide who is 
presenting which part of the presentation. If you’re observing one, it’s 
the chaos of hearing multiple people talking over one another or, even 
worse, simply reading their slides word-for-word and ignoring their 
audience. 
For many organizations, group presentations are a part of life. Your 
team may deliver a group pitch to a new client, or perhaps the capstone 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  3 Group Presentation Pitfalls — and How to Avoid Them
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

exercise of your leadership development program includes a series of 
group presentations to the head of your business unit. Virtual meetings 
make these presentations easier than ever because your team doesn’t 
have to be in the same location.
Putting together an effective group presentation takes teamwork and 
coordination so it doesn’t look like a patchwork quilt. And yet, many of 
us never budget the time to fully prepare. 
What’s at stake here? Every presentation is an opportunity to build trust 
with your audience. The cohesiveness of your group presentation is an 
indicator to your clients of what their relationship will be like working 
with you. If your presentation is disjointed and disorganized, your client 
will wonder what the outcome of your project will be. If one member 
of your team puts down another during the presentation, how will your 
team treat the client’s team? You are presenting a glimpse into your 
working relationship as well as into your organization’s capabilities. 
My colleagues and I have been coaching our clients on their group 
presentations for nearly 20 years. In addition, I’m part of the faculty 
in an executive education course on persuasive communication at the 
Harvard Kennedy School. This three-week course culminates in a series 
of group presentations, which I evaluate along with the other faculty in 
the program. 
Based on this experience, here are some of the common mistakes we see 
in group presentations, followed by a few best practices to keep you on 
track. 
Video Available Online
To view, please visit this article at HBR.org.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  3 Group Presentation Pitfalls — and How to Avoid Them
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Three Common Missteps
1. Each slide looks like it was designed by a different person. 
When no single person is in charge of a presentation, you tend to see 
a disjointed slide deck of different fonts, text styles, and images. You 
also see people put their entire script on the slide and read from it 
word-for-word. This distracts your audience and loses their attention. 
2. Presenters talk over one another. 
When we don’t take the time to decide who is covering what — and 
how we will transition from one person to the next — we start to 
interrupt one another, which reduces our professionalism. One of 
my clients once said to me, “What must our clients be thinking 
when we interrupt one another?”
3. Forgetting that you are “on.” 
Once someone finishes their part of a group presentation, they are so 
relieved to be done speaking that they forget they are still “on stage” 
or on camera. They start checking their phone or zoning out instead of 
actively listening to the person speaking next.
Luckily, each of those missteps can be prevented with the right 
preparation. 
Three Best Practices 
1. Strategize in advance.
When preparing for any type of presentation, I teach people to ask three 
questions: Who is your audience? What is your goal? and Why you? For 
group presentations, it’s important to answer those questions together. 
The last question, Why you?, which actually means Why do you care?, 
prompts you to share your own motivations on the topic, helping your 
team bond as a cohesive unit. 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  3 Group Presentation Pitfalls — and How to Avoid Them
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

When you add a group presentation to your calendar, block off time 
to prepare as a group. Use this time to agree on your audience’s level 
of knowledge about the topic, your specific goal for the presentation, 
the main message, the general outline and who will present each 
section before each of you starts writing your individual components. 
This helps you avoid the last-minute stress trying to fit each of your 
slides into one cohesive unit. Also decide who will take what kinds 
of questions, or decide who on the team will be in charge of fielding
questions and assigning them to the right person to answer.
2. Practice as a group. 
Before the presentation, make time for a complete run-through, with 
slides. Specifically, practice your transitions from one person to the 
next, such as, Stacey did a great job talking us through the challenges of 
entering this new market. Now, I’ll provide a few solutions based on our 
firm’s expertise. Use a timer to ensure you are keeping to the allotted 
time, or set a realistic time limit based on the format of your meeting, 
so you ensure plenty of time to field questions. Make time to evaluate 
the slides together so that the language, font, and use of graphics are 
consistent. 
3. Deliver with confidence and authenticity.
When it’s time for the group presentation itself, lead with the 
speaker who best represents your organization; give junior speakers 
an opportunity to present in the middle. This ensures a strong first
impression and takes some of the pressure off newer speakers. When 
speaking in person, position yourself so that you can reference the 
slides but speak directly to the audience. Bring your own personality to 
the presentation; you could say something like, If you’re from California 
like I am, then you’ll know…Personal anecdotes that connect to the 
audience are a terrific way to build trust between the audience and each 
member of the group presenting. 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  3 Group Presentation Pitfalls — and How to Avoid Them
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

What changes in a virtual setting? 
All the above suggestions hold true in virtual presentations, especially 
the importance of doing a complete run-through on the virtual platform 
you’ll be using. In these situations, designate one person to run the 
slides for the entire presentation so each person doesn’t have to 
share their screen. Ensure each speaker has a professional background, 
adequate lighting on their face, and is clearly audible. Use this video for 
reference on how to prepare for virtual presentations. When speaking, 
look directly into the camera lens so the audience sees and feels 
your eye contact. When you are not speaking, mute yourself so your 
background noise doesn’t interfere with the speaker.
Done well, a group presentation demonstrates the strength of your 
team and the quality of your work. Take advantage of this powerful 
opportunity to build trust with your audience and, as a result, help your 
organization succeed.
This article was originally published online on November 22, 2021.
Allison Shapira teaches “The Arts of Communication” at the 
Harvard Kennedy School and is the Founder/CEO of Global Public 
Speaking, a training firm that helps emerging and established leaders 
to speak clearly, concisely, and confidently. She is the author of
the new book, Speak with Impact: How to Command the Room and Influence
Influence Others (HarperCollins Leadership).
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  3 Group Presentation Pitfalls — and How to Avoid Them
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
