Digital
Article
Presentations
Three Steps to Make
Your Next Speech
Your Best
by Nick Morgan
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Three Steps to Make Your
Next Speech Your Best
by Nick Morgan
Published on HBR.org  /  March 12, 2010  /  Reprint H004H3
In my experience of over two decades of
coaching executives in their public speaking,
I rarely run across one who has both the
time and the inclination to do what it takes
to deliver a great speech. Most of them are
satisfied with average, which is partly why
there are so many bad speeches given. The
bar is set very low, and most executives are
content to clear the bar, just.
What’s to be done about this sorry state of rhetorical affairs? Here, I offer
three quick steps leaders can take right now to improve their next speech.
The steps are conceptually sophisticated but relatively easy to implement,
thus fitting the busy executive lifestyle and addressing the natural
objections of time and inclination.
First, step out from behind the podium and choreograph your
relationship to the audience.
Our unconscious minds constantly monitor four zones of space between
us and other people. We’ve evolved this incredibly sophisticated,
unconscious radar to keep us safe, and it has important implications for
public speaking. Twelve feet or more is public space, and it is the coolest
category. We’re not very interested in anyone, in survival terms, who’s
more than twelve feet away from us. So we don’t pay much attention.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Three Steps to Make Your Next Speech Your Best
Copyright © 2010 Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Twelve feet to four feet is social space. Here, we’re paying about as much
attention as you do to someone standing in the next circle at a cocktail
party. You note them, but you’re OK to keep talking to someone else.
Four feet to a foot and a half is personal space, and now we’re paying close
attention. In fact, we want to keep our eyes on anyone in that space all the
time. Again, it’s a safety issue. That person is close enough to us to do us
harm, so we’re going to stay focused.
Finally, a foot and a half to zero is intimate space, and at this level we only
are comfortable letting in people that we trust a good deal. Spouses, family
members, close friends, the attractive person you just met at that party
after downing seven beers — these are the people we let into intimate
space.
What are the implications for public speaking? Standing behind a podium
means that you’re almost guaranteed to be more than twelve feet from
everyone. That means that no one is very interested in you, at the
unconscious level. So one of the easiest ways to up the ante on your
performance is to warm up the connections between you and your
audience by leaving the podium and entering into carefully chosen
audience member’s personal space.
Thanks to comfort monitors and hanging screens, you don’t even have to
leave your speech behind, but it does help to know the speech well, so that
you don’t forget what you’re doing when you try to walk and talk at the
same time.
Move toward your audience, and particular audience members, when
you’re making an important point, and away when you want to signal a
break or a change of subject. This choreography is a simple, easy way to
enormously improve the connection you make with your audience,
without even raising your voice.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Three Steps to Make Your Next Speech Your Best
Copyright © 2010 Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Second, listen to your audience.
This may sound a bit odd — isn’t the audience supposed to listen to you? —
but all successful communication is two-way, and listening to your
audience is a great way to increase your charisma. It will get the folks in
the seats basking in your attention.
So how do you listen to the audience? The best way is to put regular
breaks into your speech — at least every twenty minutes, and preferably
every ten — where you stop and take the audience’s temperature. Ask if it
has questions, ask for reactions, ask for it to relate its own experience
relative to what you’re talking about.
You can save Q and A until the end, but it’s less effective. People forget
questions they may have had ten minutes ago.
Now, here’s the important part. When you ask the audience something,
you must wait for a response. If you wait a nanosecond or two, because
you’re in adrenaline mode, and then decide that no one is going to speak
up, and go on with your speech, you will be telling the audience never to
respond. The speaker sets the rules.
And here’s the other important part. When you do listen, listen with your
whole body. That means stopping whatever you’re doing physically, and
turning your whole body to the questioner and holding still. That’s
surprisingly hard to do for busy speakers on the go, but it’s essential if
you’re to reap the advantages of listening in charisma. Many speakers get
the gist of the question half way through and start to move on before the
questioner has finished. That’s not charismatic. That’s dismissive.
Finally, focus on your emotional intentions for approximately three
minutes before important meetings and speeches.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Three Steps to Make Your Next Speech Your Best
Copyright © 2010 Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Many executives mistakenly think that leadership means not being
emotional. That’s a big mistake. Think about successful, charismatic
leaders, like Steve Jobs, or your favorite politician. People respond to them
because of their passion for their subject, their cause, or their products.
Charisma comes from the focus of powerful, contagious emotions — like
joy, enthusiasm, anger — so spend a few minutes living that emotion as
strongly as you can before you go out to speak or go into a meeting. If you
practice this, you will show up with greatly enhanced charisma and
energy, and people will be drawn to you.
How do you focus? Identify the emotion first, and then think of a time
when you naturally experienced it. Recall that time as powerfully as you
can, invoking each of the five senses, for several minutes just before your
speech or meeting. What did the experience taste like? Smell like? Sound
like? Feel like? Look like? Run through these sensory cues, put yourself
back into the moment, and bring the emotion to life. Then go out and
knock ’em dead.
Practice these three shortcuts to effective leadership communications and
watch the bar go up — way up — on your performances.
Nick Morgan is President of Public Words Inc, a communications consulting
firm, and author of Trust Me: Four Steps to Authenticity and Charisma.
Nick Morgan is a speaker, coach, and the president and founder of
Public Words, a Boston-based communications consulting firm.  He is
the author of Can You Hear Me? How to Connect with People in a Virtual
World.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Three Steps to Make Your Next Speech Your Best
Copyright © 2010 Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
