Digital Article / Business Communication
5 Tips for Off-the-Cuff Speaking
How to say a few words. by John Coleman
Published on HBR.org  /  August 29, 2014  /  Reprint H00YSA
If it’s true that many people fear public speaking more than death, it’s 
equally true that businesspeople are condemned to a thousand small 
deaths in client pitches, in boardrooms, and on stage. And that death 
can turn slow and torturous when you are asked to speak unexpectedly 
with little or no time to prepare. One of the key demands of business is 
the ability to speak extemporaneously. Whether giving an unexpected 
“elevator pitch” to a potential investor or being asked at the last minute 
to offer remarks to a sales team over dinner, the demands for a business 
person to speak with limited preparation are diverse, endless, and — to 
many — terrifying.
Copyright © 2014 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

I became more comfortable with these situations through one of 
my primary activities in college, competitive public speaking called 
“forensics” (from the Latin “forensis,” which means “in an open court, 
public”). In forensics, one of my favorite categories was “limited 
preparation” in which we were given between 1 and 30 minutes to 
prepare a 5–7 minute speech. The lessons learned in those limited 
preparation events have paid huge dividends to my work in business. 
They carried me through my first consulting case interviews right out of 
college. They’ve helped me address complex questions from bosses and 
board members. And they’ve helped me when I’ve been put on the spot 
to address college classes and new analyst training sessions.
No matter your position, they can also be useful to you. Here are a few of 
the tips I picked up along the way:
1. Define a structure: The pressure of extemporaneous remarks comes 
from their ambiguity. What do I say? What do I not say? The worst 
and most stressful business speeches are those that ramble without 
purpose. In forensics we’d tackle this issue by quickly drafting a 
structure on a notecard to support our main point — often an 
introduction, two or three supporting points, and a conclusion. With 
these on paper, it was easy to fill in the details with stories, examples, 
and statistics. Now, when I’m asked to offer unexpected remarks over 
dinner or at a board meeting, I grab a napkin, notebook, or the back 
of a PowerPoint deck and jot down my main argument and some key 
supporting points. Then I fill out the examples and data I need to 
make those points — usually in 20 words or less. Any ambiguity or 
tendency to ramble evaporates.
2. Put the punchline first: When I worked in consulting, one of 
the cardinal rules of communication was “punchline first.” Any 
presentation should have a clear thesis stated up front so that 
listeners can easily follow and interpret the comments that follow. 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  5 Tips for Off-the-Cuff Speaking
Copyright © 2014 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

I can’t tell you how many times I’ve seen business presenters ramble 
through a speech with the audience wondering to the very end about 
the point of the comments. Giving a good business speech is not like 
telling a good joke. Don’t save the punchline for the end.
3. Remember your audience: All it takes is a few lines to make an 
audience feel acknowledged and a speech feel fresh. Tie the city 
in which you are speaking into your introduction. Draw parallels 
between the organization you’re addressing and one of the stories you 
tell. Mention someone by name, connecting them to the comments 
you’re offering. These are small gestures, but they make your remarks 
more tailored and relevant.
4. Memorize what to say, not how to say it: How many times have you 
practiced exactly how to say something in your head then frozen up 
or completely forgotten in the moment? In forensics speeches, we’d 
often have 5–10 citations to remember, 3–4 examples with names 
and places, and 3–4 supporting statistics. That’s a lot to research 
and remember in 30 minutes or less. The trick was this: We’d focus 
on memorizing key stories and statistics, rather than practicing our 
delivery. If you spend your time on how to say something perfectly, 
you’ll stumble through those phrasings, and you’ll forget all the 
details that can make them come alive. Or worse, you’ll slavishly read 
from a PowerPoint or document rather than hitting the high points 
fluidly with your audience. If you know your topic, the words will 
come.
5. Keep it short: Blaise Pascal once famously commented, “I have only 
made this letter rather long because I have not had time to make it 
shorter.” While it seems like the challenge of speaking with limited 
preparation would be finding enough to say, the opposite is often true. 
When at a loss for words, many of us underestimate the time we need 
— cramming in so many stories and points that we run well over our 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  5 Tips for Off-the-Cuff Speaking
Copyright © 2014 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

time and dilute our message. No one will appreciate your economy of 
words more than your listeners, so when in doubt, say less.
There’s no substitute for practice in offering impromptu remarks, and 
there are many things to consider when preparing for a great talk. 
But mastering a few basics, like those above, can make these public 
comments less stressful to prepare and easier for audiences to hear.
This article was originally published online on August 29, 2014.
JC
John Coleman is the author of the HBR Guide to Crafting Your 
Purpose (Harvard Business Review Press, 2022).
@johnwcoleman
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  5 Tips for Off-the-Cuff Speaking
Copyright © 2014 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
