Digital 
Article
Business Communication
Why You Must Rehearse
A few years back, we worked with the CEO of a company on a speech 
assignment that promised to be both fun and challenging. The CEO 
had built the company from nothing to dominate its industry. He had 
achieved a great deal, and was now ready to tell his story to the world. 
He had […] by Nick Morgan
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Why You Must Rehearse
A few years back, we worked with the CEO of a company on a speech 
assignment that promised to be both fun and challenging. The CEO 
had built the company from nothing to dominate its industry. He had 
achieved a great deal, and was now ready to tell his story to the world. He 
had […] by Nick Morgan
Published on HBR.org  /  June 09, 2011  /  Reprint H007AN
A few years back, we worked with the CEO of a company on a speech 
assignment that promised to be both fun and challenging. The CEO 
had built the company from nothing to dominate its industry. He had 
achieved a great deal, and was now ready to tell his story to the world. 
He had spoken to his employees, and a few industry groups, before, but 
had never ventured outside of this narrow sphere of influence.
Now he wanted to go big. He got in touch with a speaker bureau, and 
asked it to book him. The bureau counseled him to go small — to begin 
with a modest venue and a small audience. Just to get the hang of it.
He rejected that advice. He persuaded the speaker bureau to get him a 
large audience — 6,000 people — and a high fee for his first time out. 
So the bureau called us in to help write the speech. The stakes were high 
and the speaker inexperienced. A coach seemed like a good idea.
We wrote the speech, and it was a compelling one — if I do say so — 
because the CEO was an immigrant who started with nothing and built 
the company up through hard work and business savvy — a classic 
‘rags to riches’ story. This was a person who changed the world in a 
significant way and had as a result a good message for people to hear.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Why You Must Rehearse
Copyright © 2011 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Once everyone was happy with the speech, we proposed that the 
speaker rehearse. The CEO resisted, saying, “I’m very comfortable under 
pressure, because of my extensive martial arts training. I’ll be fine.”
We pressed hard, but the speaker ultimately did not rehearse beyond 
talking through the script in a 10-minute session in his palatial 
apartment overlooking Central Park in New York.
I called my good friends at the speaker bureau to warn them that our 
speaker hadn’t rehearsed and I was worried. They thanked me for the 
warning, and we all held our collective breaths.
The big day and the debut came, and with it … disaster.
The stage was quite wide, and the conference organizers had put a 
couch in the middle of the wide expanse to break it up. At one end of 
the stage — stage right — was the podium, and at the other end, a potted 
plant. The speaker began at the podium, but soon left it to roam the 
stage.
A couple of minutes in, he jumped up on the couch and executed what 
everyone figured out later must have been a half-remembered Kung Fu 
move. It was dramatic; the audience was riveted. Then he jumped down, 
uttered a few lines from the speech, and jumped up on the couch again, 
performing another semi-martial-arts maneuver, and a few more lines 
from the speech.
He kept up this astounding mixture of speaking and martial arts ballet 
until he had managed to get through — incoherently — about half the 
speech. Then he (mercifully) stopped and asked for questions.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Why You Must Rehearse
Copyright © 2011 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

There were none. 6,000 people in the audience were stunned into 
silence.
The CEO has never spoken in front of a large audience again. The 
speaker bureau didn’t talk to me for three years, even though the 
CEO had the decency to call both me and the speaker bureau up and 
apologize. The organizer of the event has a ‘bootleg’ tape of the speech 
which is played at late night ‘after event’ parties to riotous laughter. 
They coined the phrase ‘jumping the couch’ from this incident to 
describe a speaker who melts down during a speech.
You must rehearse. You don’t want to jump the couch. Adrenaline plays 
funny tricks on the mind, and you need to establish the muscle memory 
of a full, physical rehearsal in order to give your body something 
remembered to do when the adrenaline kicks in. A mental run-through 
is not enough. You must rehearse.
If find yourself arguing with me, or yourself, giving reasons why you 
don’t need to rehearse, that’s a red public speaking flag. Professionals 
rehearse. Amateurs jump the couch. So rehearse.
(Some details have been changed to protect the CEO in question.)
Dr. Nick Morgan is President of Public Words Inc., a communications 
consulting company, and the author of Give Your Speech, Change the 
World, and Trust Me: Four Steps to Authenticity and Charisma. He 
writes and speaks frequently on communications issues.
This article was originally published online on June 09, 2011.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Why You Must Rehearse
Copyright © 2011 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Nick Morgan is a speaker, coach, and the president and founder of 
Public Words, a Boston-based communications consulting firm.  He
is the author of Can You Hear Me? How to Connect with People in a 
Virtual World.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Why You Must Rehearse
Copyright © 2011 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
