Digital Article / Presentation Skills
How to Give a Webinar Presentation
Strategies to make the experience less awkward for you — and your audience. 
by Dorie Clark
Published on HBR.org  /  June 11, 2018  /  Reprint H04DV9
david arky/Getty Images
As more and more companies cultivate a global workforce and 
international client base, it’s increasingly necessary to present remotely. 
For years, teleconferencing was the best option, but in the past five
years internet speeds and web conferencing technologies have become 
sufficiently robust to support a shift to live video streaming. But 
presenting in a webinar — when you often don’t have access to visual 
cues about how the audience is responding — can sometimes feel 
disconcerting or awkward.
Copyright © 2018 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

In the course of promoting my books, delivering client trainings, and 
teaching executive education programs, I’ve conducted several hundred 
webinars over the past few years. Here are the strategies I’ve found to be 
most effective in engaging executive audiences.
First, make use of the camera. It’s shocking to me how many 
professionals still consider it acceptable to host webinars with no 
video, merely providing voiceover as they click through a series 
of slides. At the dawn of the webinar era, there were legitimate 
bandwidth concerns; you sometimes avoided using video so that you 
wouldn’t overtax the system and cause it to freeze (and that’s still a 
concern in some situations).
But most of the time, the internet quality should be just fine. And 
just as television flourished only when its creators stopped thinking 
of it as “radio with pictures,” it’s essential for professionals steeped in 
teleconferencing to realize that successful webinars must make use of 
the inherent strengths and possibilities of the medium — namely video. 
Many professionals don’t like looking at themselves on camera, but 
that’s not a valid excuse when you consider how much more engaged 
listeners are when watching a real person talk to them, rather than a 
disembodied voice. It may feel uncomfortable to present in the absence 
of audience feedback, but one popular trick is to simply imagine a 
good friend of yours “on the other end of the line” and pretend you’re 
presenting to that person.
Second, an important corollary point: If you’re using the camera, you 
have to be mindful of visual aesthetics. We’ve all been on the receiving 
end of this, watching colleagues whose eyes were permanently skewed 
to one side because of the placement of their camera, or whose laptop 
lens gave us a view of their chin and the ceiling. If you’re going 
to be presenting online, it’s essential to plan your visuals carefully. 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Give a Webinar Presentation
Copyright © 2018 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Specifically, adjust your camera so that it’s giving a straight-on view of 
your face (even if that means propping your laptop up on several books). 
Test it out with a practice session to see how your chosen backdrop will 
appear to participants.
For instance, you’ll likely want to avoid presenting in front of a window, 
because the light coming in from behind you may render you almost 
too dark to see. Similarly, make sure the backdrop is professional, such 
as a bookcase or diplomas or a tasteful piece of art. One participant in 
my “Recognized Expert” course purchased a brightly colored abstract 
painting because he knew it would provide a memorable visual anytime 
he was interviewed or conducted a webinar. As with any television 
appearance, it’s best to avoid busy patterns or dangly jewelry, which 
can distract a viewer.
Next, it’s a good idea to rehearse the mechanics of the webinar software 
you’re using. When I conduct webinars for clients or universities, I’m 
expected to use their preferred software; I can count at least seven 
types that I’ve had to employ. The fundamentals of each platform are 
similar, of course, but the particulars are just different enough that it’s 
worth a brief run-through, including how to toggle between slides and 
screen sharing (this is the part that most frequently stymies me in the 
moment), how to mute or unmute participants (it’s a very good idea 
to mute everyone upon entry to avoid random blasts of noise), how to 
access questions or comments, and how to run instant polls.
One often-overlooked element is ensuring you’re able to maintain eye 
contact with the camera so that you appear to be looking viewers in 
the eye. Some platforms display video images in one corner by default 
— and if so, it’s likely that your eyes will drift over there, making you 
appear to be staring offo  to one side for no reason. Guard against this 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Give a Webinar Presentation
Copyright © 2018 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

by familiarizing yourself with the platform and adjusting the default 
settings as needed.
Finally, one essential element that’s worth deciding on in advance is 
how you’ll handle audience participation. Depending on the number 
of attendees, you may ask them to “raise their hand” if they have a 
question, type their questions into the comment box, or use a separate 
Q&A feature. Whatever you decide, make sure you’re explicit at the 
beginning of the webinar and remind people periodically throughout, to 
avoid frustration or confusion.
It may take participants some time to formulate their questions, 
especially if they’re writing them down, so it’s a good idea to give several 
minutes’ warning before you dive into the Q&A. Otherwise, you 
may encounter a few awkward moments of silence when you ask for 
questions and people are still busy typing. If the number of attendees is 
large enough (implying that there will be a heavy stream of comments), 
you may want to have an assistant on hand who can help you dig 
through questions and identify the most promising ones, so you don’t 
have to multitask.
In the corporate world, professionals are increasingly asked to present 
via webinar. (In fact, how to do it effectively is one of the most common 
questions I receive during the executive communication programs I 
teach for Duke University’s Fuqua School of Business.) The financial
and time-saving benefits of online presentations are obvious, so it’s a 
trend that will only continue to grow. By mastering these techniques 
and enhancing your webinar presentation skills, you’ll make yourself a 
more persuasive and effective leader.
This article was originally published online on June 11, 2018.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Give a Webinar Presentation
Copyright © 2018 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Dorie Clark is a marketing strategist and professional speaker 
who teaches at Columbia Business School. She is the author 
of Entrepreneurial You: Monetize Your Expertise, Create Multiple 
Income Streams, and Thrive (Harvard Business Review Press, 2017); 
Stand Out: How to Find Your Breakthrough Idea and Build a 
Following Around It (Portfolio, 2015); Reinventing You: DefineDefine Your 
Brand, Imagine Your Future (Harvard Business Review Press, 2013); 
and The Long Game: How to Be a Long-Term Thinker in a Short-Term 
World (Harvard Business Review Press, 2021).
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Give a Webinar Presentation
Copyright © 2018 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
