Digital 
Article
Presentation Skills
What the Best Presenters 
Do Differently
Don’t let your slides get in the way of telling a compelling story. 
by Carmine Gallo
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

What the Best Presenters Do 
Differently
Don’t let your slides get in the way of telling a compelling story. 
by Carmine Gallo
Published on HBR.org  /  April 27, 2022  /  Reprint H070GG
AlexSava/Getty Images
According to Pulitzer Prize–winning historian Doris Kearns Goodwin, 
villagers would come from far and wide to hear Abraham Lincoln, then 
a prairie lawyer with a gift for storytelling. Lincoln didn’t have the 
benefit of modern technology. He stood on a tree stump instead of a 
TED stage, and PowerPoint wouldn’t be invented for another 130 years. 
And yet Lincoln “could simultaneously educate, entertain, and move 
his audiences,” writes Goodwin.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What the Best Presenters Do Differently
Copyright © 2022 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

While the tools of communication have changed since Lincoln regaled 
crowds with his storytelling techniques, the human brain has not. Our 
minds are wired for story. We think in narrative and enjoy consuming 
content in story form.
Understanding the difference between presenting and storytelling is 
critical to a leader’s ability to engage an audience and move them 
to action. Unfortunately, presentation software often gets in the way. 
Slides should be designed to complement a story, not to replace the 
storyteller.
Following are five storytelling strategies to help you stand out the next 
time you give a presentation.
Presenters open PowerPoint. Storytellers craft a narrative.
If you want to engage your audience, you have to tell a story. But for 
most people who prepare presentations, storytelling is not top of mind.
Most “presenters” do what sounds logical: They begin by opening the 
slideware. But most presentation programs aren’t storytelling tools. 
They’re digital delivery mechanisms. PowerPoint’s default template 
asks for a title and text.
A bulleted list is not a story. A story is a connected series of events 
told through words and/or pictures. A story has a theme, attention-
grabbing moments, heroes and villains, and a satisfying conclusion. 
Nicely designed slides cannot compensate for a poorly structured story.
Award-winning movie directors read or write the story before picking 
up a camera. They see the movie play out by sketching or drawing 
each scene on storyboards. In much the same way, effective presenters 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What the Best Presenters Do Differently
Copyright © 2022 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

think through the elements of their content long before they open 
PowerPoint.
Before you sit down to create your slides, try this three-step process. 
First, write down your idea as if you were telling someone a story. Since 
you don’t naturally write or speak in bullet points, avoid them. Instead, 
use complete sentences with nouns, verbs, and transitions between 
paragraphs and ideas. Second, visualize each of your main concepts by 
“storyboarding”: sketching ideas on a whiteboard or a blank sheet of 
paper. Finally, gather the assets that will bring your story to life: videos, 
animations, graphics, or photos.
Presenters use text. Storytellers love pictures.
While serving as commander of the International Space Station, Chris 
Hadfield became a social media sensation by picking up a guitar and 
singing David Bowie’s “Space Oddity” while floating weightless. Back on 
Earth, his celebrated TED Talk has attracted more than 11 million views.
Hadfield’s presentation, “What I learned from going blind in space,” 
was an astonishing display of visual storytelling. His PowerPoint deck 
contained 35 slides — with no text. Instead, Hadfield relied on pictures, 
images, animations, and videos to introduce the audience to a world few 
will ever experience.
Researchers have found that your audience will recall about 10% of the 
content if they simply hear information. But the “picture superiority effect
effect” means that if they hear information and see a picture, they’ll 
retain 65%.
Florence Nightingale understood picture superiority more than a 
century before the invention of PowerPoint. Nightingale was a 
statistician and mathematician. She was also an empathetic nurse 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What the Best Presenters Do Differently
Copyright © 2022 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

who was shocked to discover that more British soldiers were dying 
from unsanitary conditions in hospitals than were dying of battle 
wounds. When Nightingale sought funding from British authorities 
to improve conditions, she translated the dry data into a color-coded 
graphic. Nightingale knew that humans were moved more by stories
and pictures than data and text alone.
If you want to engage an audience, build a presentation that favors 
pictures to complement the story you tell. A combination of images and 
words improves learning much more than words can do on their own.
Presenters dump data. Storytellers humanize it.
As Nightingale discovered, the human brain was not built to make sense 
of large numbers. Data is abstract until it’s put into context that people 
can understand. And people can understand people.
I once met with a group of executives at a large medical equipment 
company preparing to launch a new brain-scanning machine at a 
prestigious conference. They sent me hundreds of pages of clinical data 
to prove the technology could identify a patient’s condition faster and 
more accurately than any existing device.
“Where are the people?” I asked.
While the data provided evidence for the efficacy of the technology, it 
didn’t tell a story. Only humans could do that.
After a few hours of brainstorming with the executive team, we decided 
to put faces to the data. We built a presentation around two typical 
patients — David and Susan — who would benefit from the technology 
should they enter a hospital with symptoms of a possible stroke or heart 
attack.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What the Best Presenters Do Differently
Copyright © 2022 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

At the same conference the following year, the executive who had 
delivered the presentation was walking down a hallway when a 
physician stopped him and said, “You’re the David and Susan guy. Great 
presentation.” The attendee hadn’t remembered all the data, but the 
story left an impression.
The next time you have large datasets to present, add a face to the 
statistics.
Presenters are predictable. Storytellers surprise audiences.
Most PowerPoints are boring because they’re predictable. We know 
what comes next — another slide of bullet points, followed by another, 
and another. A good story, however, has the element of surprise.
When Steve Jobs introduced the first iPod, he told the audience that 
the music player could store 1,000 songs. While other music players on 
the market could make the same claim, Jobs explained that none of the 
competitors could fit in your pocket. And with the flair of a magician 
pulling a rabbit out of his hat, Jobs reached into the pocket of his jeans 
and pulled out the smallest MP3 player on the market. “One thousand 
songs in your pocket” became one of the most iconic taglines in product 
history.
Although many people considered Steve Jobs one of the most 
outstanding business presenters of our time, the Apple co-founder knew 
the real secret to winning over an audience: Create a presentation that 
complements a well-crafted story.
The human brain pays attention to novelty — twists and turns and 
unexpected events. Our brain perks up when we detect something that 
breaks a pattern.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What the Best Presenters Do Differently
Copyright © 2022 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

There’s no limit to your creativity. While you don’t need to pull products 
out of your pocket to grab the audience’s attention, do plan to surprise 
people with something they don’t expect.
Presenters practice silently. Storytellers rehearse out loud.
Most business presentations are forgettable because speakers forget 
they’re performing, not presenting. A great presentation informs, 
inspires, engages, and entertains. In other words, it’s part performance 
and should be rehearsed like one.
Most business professionals flip through their slides silently to prepare 
for a presentation. Storytellers rehearse — out loud. They practice their 
vocal delivery, adding perfectly-timed pauses and varying the pace of 
their speech. If they plan to stand in front of a group, they’ll stand 
during rehearsal. If they’re going to be seated in a Zoom call, they’ll take 
their seat in rehearsal and deliver each slide as though they’re giving the 
real thing.
• • •
When you see yourself as a storyteller, the presentation your audience 
sees will change. Don’t let presentation software get in the way of giving 
your audience information they’ll pay attention to — and retain.
This article was originally published online on April 27, 2022.
Carmine Gallo is a Harvard University instructor, keynote speaker, 
and author of 10 books translated into 40 languages. Gallo is the 
author of The Bezos Blueprint: Communication Secrets of the World’s 
Greatest Salesman (St. Martin’s Press).
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What the Best Presenters Do Differently
Copyright © 2022 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
6
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
