DOI: 10.7763/IPEDR. 2014. V 78. 18  
A Study of Visual Design in PowerPoint Presentation Slide and Its 
Relationship with Postgraduate Learner Engagement and Satisfaction  
Tse Chwan Ang 1, Mariam Mohamad 2 
1 Faculty of Applied and Creative Arts, Universiti Malaysia Sarawak 
2 Center for Instructional Technology and Multimedia, Universiti Sains Malaysia 
Abstract. This paper aimed to examine the utilization of visual in PowerPoint presentation slide and 
influence on learner engagement and satisfaction. The study grounded with cognitive theories of multimedia 
learning, ARCS Model and CRAP model in developing the PowerPoint presentation slide. The study adapted 
repeated measure method on 21 postgraduate learners. The learner is presented visually non-designed and 
visually designed slide of two lecture session. Data collected through self-report questionnaire and 
observation during the lecture session. Data from the study were analyzed using repeated measures analysis 
of variance (RM ANOVA) and descriptive statistic. The result of the study revealed no significant 
relationship between visual design of presentation slide on learner engagement and satisfaction, but the mean 
score of learner engagement and satisfaction is higher for the session with visually designed slides. The 
findings provide useful insight for instructors into the need for enhancing the knowledge and technical skill 
in developing of visual design for presentation, and researchers to further establish the study of visual design 
in presentation slide. Furthermore, findings of the study reveals relationship of lecturer teaching style on 
learner engagement and satisfaction.  
Keywords: Visual Design, PowerPoint Presentation Slide, Engagement, Satisfaction 
1. Introduction  
Technology had improved learning in term of efficiency, flexibility through multidimensional approach 
and learner performance; hence, the learner has access to larger quantity and better quality of information 
[1][2][3]. Teaching and learning environment is never being segregated from multimedia [2]. Today, in an 
instructional event, mode (text, narration and picture) for delivering the content is remain unchanged, but due 
to the advancement of the technology, the medium for delivering the media was shifted to be a more 
technological environment. Presentation slide as a delivery medium is used to emphasize key point, show 
complex image and reveal the organization of the presentation [4] which generates higher comprehension in 
the learner [4][5][6]. Visual aid such as PowerPoint presentation slide enhances the flexibility of presentation, 
further increase the effectiveness of the presentation [7] and enhances learner attitudes towards the instructor 
and the presentation session [4].  
Some researcher suggested that teaching tools can be poorly executed [4][8]. Furthermore, there is a 
broad account of study found that people are having a bad experience from PowerPoint presentation [9]. 
According to [5], presenter often faced difficulty in designing presentation slide using PowerPoint; it takes 
much effort to change typography, color and layout. In the later study by [10], users of PowerPoint have 
been often lack of experience to design an effective presentation slide. It is also found that the principle for 
designing PowerPoint presentations is not apprehended with certainty, in the result, this might cause negative 
impact on the learning process [12]. 
It is suggested from prior study to determine the functional aspect of non-text information and visual in 
presentation to improve the communication process through design of visual stimuli in term of the learning 
process [12][13]. According to Chen [12], “Learning is improved by well-communicated visual”. Visual in 
presentation function as supporting towards speaker narration and integration of visual and verbal 
information which focus audience attention, increase interest and enhance retention [7]. Visual are not solely 
                                                           
 Corresponding author.  
   E-mail address: angtc@hotmail.my. 
91

images, but also integration of text explanation, guidance and message which is literally through the appeals 
to the human eye. 
The method of visualizing learning material will define the engagement of teacher and learner in the 
process of teaching and learning [15]. Visual effectively direct learner attention towards important 
information, giving learner support in organizing it into meaningful way [14][16] and reducing processing 
effort [14]. Effective use of visual imagery can increase learner learning process in term of comprehension 
and recall of the class material, engagement and improve attitudes about the classroom experience [17] and 
learner participation in a lesson. Is it suggested that PowerPoint presentation with no concern about the 
visual design can cause learner disengagement [18]. Learners who engaged in learning activity learn more, 
retain more, and enjoy the learning activity more that those who are not [19]. Thus, result in greater 
educational outcomes [20]. 
The study suggested the link between the presentation and learner satisfaction [21]. Satisfaction is a 
feeling of fulfillment response from judgment towards the product or services [22]. The user had expectation 
originate from the belief of performance or quality that a product or service will provide [22]. The stage of 
satisfaction will result in the intention of the learner either to stay or quit which in turn lead to learner 
retention. Learner satisfaction and motivation are higher with multimedia learning environment [2]. Learner 
reacts positively towards used of technology in teaching and learning process. But on the other hand, some 
learner and instructor having bad experience in multimedia learning, it shows that not everyone benefits from 
the advance of technology itself.  
The research study is grounded with three theoretical areas: (1) learning theory: Cognitive theory of 
multimedia learning by Richard Mayer [23], (2) Motivational theory: ARCS model by John Keller [24], (3) 
Graphic design principle: C.R.A.P model by Robin Williams [25]. These theories are a significant part of the 
study in bridging between learning theory with motivational theory and visual design principle of 
implementing effective, functional and motivated instructional material-presentation slide. This paper aimed 
to examine the utilization of visual in PowerPoint presentation slide and influence on learner engagement 
and satisfaction. 
2. Methodology 
By using repeated measurement method, the samples in this study were 21 postgraduate students who 
enroll in a coursework postgraduate program in one of the public universities in Malaysia. The study is 
conducted in two fold. During the development stage, the content of the lesson is provided by the subject 
lecturer and the visual design of the presentation slides is developed by the researcher based on the guideline 
and recommendation by expert personals from several sources[26][27][28]. Visual design guideline adapted 
in this study is based on the concerns of slide layout, typography, graphic and color usage. 2 presentation 
slides are developed for the study. First Presentation slide is visually non-designed, second presentation slide 
is visually designed. During experimental stage, data collection is conducted before treatment (visually non-
designed presentation), during (observation in both presentation sessions) and after treatment (visually 
designed presentation).  
Data was collected using self-report questionnaire survey and observation during the presentation session 
to identify the effect of the visual design in presentation slide towards learner engagement and satisfaction. 
Two instruments were used in the study. First, an evaluation form for expert to review and validate of the 
visual design and motivational design of PowerPoint presentation slide. Second, a self-report survey 
questionnaire which is adapted from Instructional Material Motivation Survey (IMMS) by John M. Keller, 
Student Academic Engagement Scale (SAENS) by Rupayana D. D., and Principle Experience Sampling 
Method (ESM) by Northwestern University, and Faculty Survey of Student Engagement (FSSE) by The 
Trustees of Indiana University. Both instruments were validated by expert and undergoes a pilot test with 
postgraduate learners. Descriptive statistical analysis was used to compare the mean score for engagement 
and satisfaction in both controlled and treatment conditions. Further, repeated measures ANOVA was used 
92
2.1 Research Design 
2.2 Data Collection and Measures 

to statistically analysis the significance of visual design on learner engagement and satisfaction. Open-ended 
responses from survey questionnaire are analyzed using text mining method to extract the key concepts from 
the respondent and grouped them into categories. The result of the statistical and text mining analysis is 
externally validated with the data of observation collected during the presentation session.  
3. Result and Discussion  
3.1 Repeated measure ANOVA 
The repeated measure ANOVA data analysis examines the effect of the visual design of presentation slide on 
learner engagement and satisfaction.  
Table 1: Within-Subjects Effects for Learner Engagement and Satisfaction 
Source 
Type III Sum of Squares
 
df 
Mean Square 
F 
Sig. 
Engagement  
Designed slide and non
-designed 
slide 
2.381 
1 
2.381 
3.257 
.086 
Satisfaction  
Designed slide and non
-designed 
slide 
.214 
1 
.214 
.417 
.526 
Error  
10.286 
20 
.514  
 
 
Table 2: Descriptive Statistics (Overall) 
 
 
Mean
 
Std. Deviation
 
N
 
engagement
 
non-designed slide
 
3.52
 
.981
 
21
 
designed slide
 
4.00
 
.775
 
21
 
satisfaction
 
non-designed slide
 
3.90
 
.831
 
21
 
designed slide
 
4.05
 
.740
 
21
 
*Note. Maximum engagement score = 5. Maximum Satisfaction score = 5. 
 
Table 1 illustrates the within-subject effects of learner engagement and satisfaction for visually designed 
slide and visually non-designed slide. It is reported that there was no significant effect of the visual design of 
presentation slide on learner engagement (F (1, 20) = 3.257, p = .086) at a significant level of 5%. Likewise, 
there was no significant effect of the visual design of presentation slide on learner satisfaction (F (1, 20) = 
0.417, p = .526) at a significant level of 5%. However, to refer to Table 2, it shows that the mean of learner 
engagement and satisfaction was increased over a week after the visually designed slide was presented.  
In providing the feedback on the overall satisfaction in the learning experience of each lesson, more than 
half participant commented for the open-ended survey question. In non-designed slide session, learner 
responses were of a few themes. Firstly, some learner thinks that the PowerPoint slide is “plain, blank 
without attractive design”, “dull”, “not good to be satisfied”, “very boring”, “the slide can be improved”, 
“must include some multimedia element to attract student”. While on the visually designed slide, learner 
commented that “I like the design of the presentation slides”, “the PowerPoint slide was very interesting and 
can attract my attention”, “very eye-catching”, “easy to understand”, “more creative, image layout is clear to 
read”, “layout and graphic are visually appealing”. It shows that learner were less satisfied with the visually 
non-designed slide session than visually designed slide session.  
From the observation of learner in class, researcher found no significant differences between control 
condition and treatment condition. Learner engagement towards the lesson is at a similar level as observed. 
Learners’ responds towards the presentation slide were not differing from each other for both lecture sessions. 
Furthermore, from the observation, the visually designed presentation slide did not yield increment in learner 
engagement as in term of attention, enjoyment and effort. Learner did not show any significant different 
reaction towards the slide for both sessions. Furthermore, it was observed that visually designed presentation 
slide did not yield differences in the instructor and learner interaction.  
However, it was noticed that learner commented on the open-ended question on the lecturer’s teaching 
style for both lecture sessions. One of the learners indicated that “the PowerPoint slides not influence my 
attention” and “the way she (lecturer) present and organized the notes attract me to focus on this lesson”. 
Besides, few learners think that the lecturer sharing of real life experience helped the lecture session to be 
more interesting. Some of the learner commented that “lecturer gave a lot of real life examples that make the 
lecturer interesting”, “lecturer has explained the lesson in a very understandable way.”, “the lecturer 
93

motivates the lesson”, “The lecturer used her experiences to explain the lesson”, “I enjoyed the class 
presentation with sharing of experiences from lecturer”, “the lecturer is good”. From these comments, the 
learner may think that the way of the lecturer presented and explained the slide influence their motivation 
and satisfaction. Besides, during the presentation session, learners are observed to be more enjoyable when 
the instructor sharing of real life example or experience which related to the discussed topic. The researcher 
observed that learners tend to ask more questions and give respond such as laughter and discuss among 
themselves during and after the lecturer sharing of her experience. The interaction of learner and lecturer is 
more during the lecture post question about the discussed topic in both treatment and non-treatment sessions.  
3.2 Visual Design of Presentation Slide and Learner Engagement 
Some learner indicates that the visually non-designed slide is “dull” and one of the learner comments 
that he/she feels “sleepy” during the presentation session. On the other hand, some learner indicated that the 
PowerPoint slide did not affect their attention in the lecture session. As so, it seems the finding is from two 
sides of possibility where some learner is benefiting from the visual design of presentation slide and also 
some are not benefiting from it. And even some may think that the visual design on presentation slide do not 
influence the learning in a lecture session. Learner motivation should be one of the major concerns when 
design for learning [29][30]. It is suggested from this study to further explore on effective visual design in 
instructional purposes which include of the motivational element as a tool to engage the learner actively. 
From the survey questionnaire, learners indicate that they are more enjoyable with the visually designed 
slide. Furthermore, they think that the presentation slide helped them to hold their attention on the lesson. 
Besides, learners also commented that the slide are visually appealing and help them to understand better in 
class. This finding supported prior study that visual in presentation slide help focus learner attention 
[7][14][16][31]. Visual design in presentation slide helps direct learner attention maybe due to the effective 
allocation of the limited working memory and reduce cognitive load [32].  
3.3 Visual Design of Presentation Slide and Learner Satisfaction 
Learner indicated that they are having greater enthusiasm for the subject after the introduction of visually 
designed presentation slide as compared to non-designed slide. Besides, they agreed which is more pleasure 
to learn with the visually designed presentation slide. Learners also commented that which is more satisfied 
with the lecture session with visually designed presentation slides. 
Prior study shows that learner satisfaction is the quality of experience which benefits the education 
institution and the society [33]. The feeling of fulfillment [22] may come from the source of the service and 
facilitating goods by the university [33][34]. From the learner’s response, teaching style of the instructor 
might be one of the major causes that yield learner satisfaction. Students tend to respond more actively on 
lecturer speech. They ask questions and discuss among themselves from the topic as discuss by the lecturer. 
Furthermore, the lecturer involve in the study having the approach of sharing the real life experience to help 
learners in understanding of the lesson. Some learners indicate that they are more satisfied of the lesson due 
to such approach. Where the learners think the lesson is more understandable and easier to relate to lesson 
content. Furthermore, learners feel that the lesson is interesting when the lecturer using the real example 
approach. The lecturer using the conversation approach where there is a discussion and sharing of experience 
between learner and lecturer might help learner to feel relaxed and more enjoyable. Furthermore, learner 
thinks lecture style affect their enjoyment [12] and lecturer playing the role as motivator in a learning session 
[35]. To consider an overall presentation quality, oral presentation should also be taken into account [3][36]. 
It is suggested from this finding to investigate how presenter and the teaching style might influence learner 
satisfaction and to which extend its help learner to engage in class. 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
This study demonstrates the effect of visual design in presentation slide towards learner engagement and 
satisfaction. It is suggested from the findings that further study of visual design in presentation slide and its 
relationship with learner engagement is important for a greater learning experience. The results indicate that 
postgraduate learners have a higher engagement and satisfaction level in a lecture session when presented a 
94

visually designed presentation slide. Learner attendance in the lesson despite of physically and mentally is 
important in the learning process; learner engagement and the factor that leads to higher level of learner 
engagement in the lecture session should be comprehended. The findings provide useful insight for 
instructors into the need for enhancing the knowledge and technical skill in developing effective visual 
design for presentation, and researchers to further establish the study of visual design in presentation slide.  
In the conclusion, future direction might give special attention to the study, which integrating effective 
visual design in presentation slide and the relationship with learner engagement and satisfaction in a lecture 
session. Besides, it is important to learn about how learner satisfaction will benefit the learner themselves, 
the institution and furthermore the society. Furthermore, from the finding of the study, it is also important to 
further investigate how teaching style might influence learner engagement and learner satisfaction towards 
the learning session. 
5. Acknowledgements  
I would like to express the deepest appreciation to my project supervisor, Dr. Mariam Mohamad, for 
kind supervision and guidance throughout this dissertation. In addition, a thank you to Dr. Zarina Samsudin 
who had helped me with data collection for this research project. I would also like to thank my parents and 
family in constant giving support mentally and financially through the postgraduate studies. Finally, 
appreciation to the help given by staff of Center for Instructional Technology and Multimedia, Universiti 
Sains Malaysia in succeeding this research project. 
6. References  
[1] Schacter, John, and Cheryl Fagnano. "Does computer technology improve student learning and achievement? How, 
when, and under what conditions?"Journal of Educational Computing Research 20, no. 4 (1999): 329-343. 
[2] Ludwig, Thomas E., David B. Daniel, Rick Froman, and Virginia A. Mathie. "Using multimedia in classroom 
presentations: Best principles." Society for the Teaching of Psychology: Pedagogical Innovations Task Force 
Report, 2005. 
[3] Garmston, Robert J. "Glad You Asked." Journal of Staff Development 21, no. 1 (2000): 73-75. 
[4] Nouri, Hossein and Abdus Shahid. "The effect of PowerPoint presentations on student learning and attitudes." 
Global Perspectives on Accounting Education 2, no. 1 (2005): 53-73. 
[5] Alley, Michael, and Harry Robertshaw. "Rethinking the design of presentation slides: Creating slides that are 
readily comprehended." In ASME 2004 International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition, pp. 445-
450. American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 2004. 
[6] Bradshaw, Amy C. "Effects of Presentation Interference in Learning with Visuals." Journal of Visual Literacy 23, 
no. 1 (2003). 
[7] Apperson, Jennifer M., Eric L. Laws, and James A. Scepansky. "An assessment of student preferences for 
PowerPoint presentation structure in undergraduate courses." Computers & Education 50, no. 1 (2008): 148-153. 
[8] Maddux, Cleborne D., Johnson D. Lamont, and Jerry W. Willis. 1997. Educational Computing: Learning With 
Tommorow's Technologies. 2nd edition. United States: Allyn & Bacon. 
[9] Farkas, David. "Understanding and using PowerPoint." In Proceedings of the STC annual conference, vol. 3, pp. 
3-320. 2005. 
[10] Lowenthal, Patrick R. "Improving the design of PowerPoint presentations." The CU Online Handbook (2009): 59. 
[11] Uz, Çiğdem, Feza Orhan and Gülşah Bilgiç. " Prospective teachers’ opinions on the value of PowerPoint 
presentations in lecturing." Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences2, no. 2 (2010): 2051-2059.  
[12] Bartsch, Robert A., and Kristi M. Cobern. "Effectiveness of PowerPoint presentations in lectures." Computers & 
Education 41, no. 1 (2003): 77-86. 
[13] Moriarty, Sandra E. "The Symbiotics of Semiotics and Visual Communication."Journal of Visual Literacy 22, no. 
1 (2002). 
[14] Chen, Elaine Huei-Lien. "A review of learning theories from visual literacy."Journal of Educational Computing, 
Design & Online Learning 5 (2004): 1-8. 
[15] Hay, David, Ian Kinchin, and Simon Lygo‐Baker. "Making learning visible: the role of concept mapping in 
higher education." Studies in Higher Education 33, no. 3 (2008): 295-311. 
[16] Gomez, Steven R., Radu Jianu, Caroline Ziemkiewicz, Hua Guo, and David H. Laidlaw. "Different strokes for 
different folks: visual presentation design between disciplines." Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE 
Transactions on 18, no. 12 (2012): 2411-2420. 
95

[17] Ulbig, Stacy G. "A Picture is Worth What? Using Visual Images to Enhance Student Engagement and Retention." 
International Journal of Instructional Media 37, no. 2 (2010): 185-200.  
[18] Kahraman, Sakıp, Ceren Çevik, and Hülya Kodan. "Investigation of university students’ attitude toward the use of 
powerpoint according to some variables."Procedia Computer Science 3 (2011): 1341-1347. 
[19] Akey, Theresa M. "School Context, Student Attitudes and Behavior, and Academic Achievement: An Exploratory 
Analysis." MDRC (2006). 
[20] Trowler, Paul, and Vicki Trowler. "Student engagement evidence summary." (2010). 
http://eprints.lancs.ac.uk/61680/1/Deliverable_2._Evidence_Summary._Nov_2010.pdf 
[21] Blalock, M. Gale, and Robert D. Montgomery. "The effect of PowerPoint on student performance in principles of 
economics: An exploratory study." Journal For Economıcs Educators 5, no. 3 (2005): 1-7. 
[22] Hom, Willard. "An Overview of Customer Satisfaction Models." (2000). 
[23] Mayer, Richard E. "Cognitive theory of multimedia learning." The Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning 
(2005): 31-48. 
[24] Keller, John M. "How to integrate learner motivation planning into lesson planning: The ARCS model approach." 
VII Semanario, Santiago, Cuba (2000): 1-13. 
[25] Williams, Robin. The non-designer's design book. Peachpit Press, 2008. 
[26] Reynolds, Gary. "Top ten slide tips." GarrReynolds. com (2005). 
[27] Lee, Sung Heum, and Elizabeth Boling. "Screen design guidelines for motivation in interactive multimedia 
instruction: A survey and framework for designers." Educational technology 39, no. 3 (1999): 19-26. 
[28] Alley, Michael, and Kathryn A. Neeley. "Rethinking the design of presentation slides: A case for sentence 
headlines and visual evidence." Technical communication 52, no. 4 (2005): 417-426. 
[29] Astleitner, Hermann, and Christian Wiesner. "An integrated model of multimedia learning and motivation." 
Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia 13, no. 1 (2004): 3-21. 
[30] Churchill, Daniel. "Presentation design for “conceptual model” learning objects."British Journal of Educational 
Technology 45, no. 1 (2014): 136-148. 
[31] Bradshaw, Amy C. "Effects of Presentation Interference in Learning with Visuals." Journal of Visual Literacy 23, 
no. 1 (2003). 
[32] Wecker, Christof. "Slide presentations as speech suppressors: When and why learners miss oral information." 
Computers & Education 59, no. 2 (2012): 260-273. 
[33] Kara, Ali, and O. W. DeShields. "Business student satisfaction, intentions and retention in higher education: An 
empirical investigation." Marketing Education Quarterly 3, no. 1 (2004): 1-25. 
[34] Douglas, Jacqueline, Alex Douglas, and Barry Barnes. "Measuring student satisfaction at a UK university." 
Quality assurance in education 14, no. 3 (2006): 251-267. 
[35] Susskind, Joshua E. "Limits of PowerPoint’s power: Enhancing students’ self-efficacy and attitudes but not their 
behavior." Computers & Education 50, no. 4 (2008): 1228-1239. 
[36] Doumont, Jean-Luc. "The cognitive style of PowerPoint: Slides are not all evil."Technical communication 52, no. 
1 (2005): 64-70. 
96
