Digital 
Article
Stress Management
6 Ways to Reduce the 
Stress of Presenting
Rehearse, but don’t obsess. by Joseph Grenny
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

6 Ways to Reduce the Stress 
of Presenting
Rehearse, but don’t obsess. by Joseph Grenny
Published on HBR.org  /  August 31, 2015  /  Reprint H02BAM
In the past 30 years, I’ve given more than 3,000 speeches to audiences 
across the world. Presentations have been such a central part of my 
work that many who know me best have been surprised to learn how 
much anxiety they used to cause me. After my fourth root canal, my 
dentist pointed out that I appeared to be grinding my teeth at night. 
He suggested a mouth guard. Over the next few years, I ground through 
three of them. Fortunately, materials science advanced faster than my 
grinding and I eventually received a more durable one. Still, I had 
almost resigned myself to the fact that fitful sleep, restless legs, and 
a variety of aches throughout my body were the price of the career I had 
chosen.
I knew I had turned a corner 10 years ago when I was invited to speak 
to a prestigious business audience at Radio City Music Hall. I slept 
peacefully the night before. And when I stepped through the crimson 
curtains to face 6,000 nattily dressed executives, my former panic and 
dread were replaced with a sense of exhilaration and gratitude.
As I came to realize that presentations would be a permanent facet of 
my career, I began accumulating tactics to increase my pleasure while 
reducing the pain. Here are six that have made an enormous difference
for me:
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  6 Ways to Reduce the Stress of Presenting
Copyright © 2015 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

1. Bless, don’t impress. I discovered that much of my stress was more 
about my motive than the event. I would fret and stew more about what 
I imagined people would think of me than whether I would effectively
serve them. I was most stressed when my motive was more about 
looking good than doing good. I recall pulling to the side of the road 
in the hills above Silicon Valley on the way to a retreat with a tech 
executive team that I was especially worried about. I asked myself, “Why 
am I doing this?” As I looked out at the Valley, the tightness in my chest 
disappeared. A sudden clarity overtook me. My errand was not about 
me — it was about them. I focused on the important ideas I hoped to 
share. I no longer cared if I did it perfectly — I only hoped I would do 
it well enough that they would be blessed by the experience. My stress 
subsides when my motive is to bless rather than impress.
2. Rehearse, but don’t obsess. I’ve learned to discern when over-
rehearsing is counterproductive. I provoke more stress in myself when 
my preparation moves past the point of diminishing returns. When it’s 
an obsession, not preparation, it’s time to simply disconnect and engage 
in some distracting activity. If I am giving a new presentation I will 
practice it three times: Once when I finish preparing it, again the day 
before, and finally a few hours before I go “on.”
3. Create rest stops. For three weeks prior to my first three-hour-long 
presentation, I could hardly digest my dinner. How could I possibly 
avoid losing my place for so long? I later discovered that while a 180-
minute presentation can seem like an uncrossable minefield, a series of 
10 minutes chunks feels more doable. I began to organize my material in 
smaller chunks that built logically on one another.
4. Make it a conversation. A related discovery that brought relief 
was that audiences hate protracted monologues almost as much as I 
fear giving them. Audiences disengage when your monologue yawns 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  6 Ways to Reduce the Stress of Presenting
Copyright © 2015 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

on. There are hundreds of clever ways to engage the audience that 
amplify the persuasiveness of your presentation, relieve the tedium of 
a lecture and reduce your anxiety by giving you rest stops. I combined 
this and the previous insight by breaking all of my lectures into small 
chunks separated by brief, relevant and topic-appropriate involvement 
activities.
Involvement activities can invite participants to think with you, feel 
with you, help you, or try something with you. For example, you could 
share data and invite the group to make sense of it with you (think); 
show a brief video that provokes relevant emotion on your topic (feel); 
ask someone to read a pertinent quote from an expert and comment 
on it (help); or attempt a skill you’re teaching in a safe and structured 
way (try). I’m often told that “sophisticated groups” don’t want to be 
involved. That’s baloney. They don’t want to be involved in silly or 
worthless ways. But they love a structured task that is relevant to the 
topic that makes them feel smart and respected.
For example, when I’m teaching the skills of our Crucial Conversations 
Training to an executive team I start out by pairing them up and asking 
them to show how they’d respond to an abusive physician in a brief 
video clip. I limit their response to one sentence, so they don’t feel they 
have to take on a dramatic role — and allow them to be playful if they 
prefer, rather than serious. That interaction anchors the subject I want 
to involve them in and warms up the room immediately. It also takes the 
pressure off of me for a moment while I get my bearings.
5. Know thyself. There’s nothing intrinsically stressful about a 
presentation. The stress is usually self-induced — often because it 
triggers some trauma you carry from a painful life experiences (i.e. 
the audience snickered when you squeaked rather than sang during a 
choir solo in third grade) that your mind conjures a connection to. Over 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  6 Ways to Reduce the Stress of Presenting
Copyright © 2015 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

time, I became aware that my self-imposed demands for perfection and 
craving of universal approval were my primary generators of anxiety. 
As I’ve developed sources of peace and a sense of worth that are 
independent of these unattainable goals, I’ve found it easier to focus 
on blessing and surrendered the need to impress.
6. Breathe. Psychologist Amy Cuddy gave me a very practical stress-
reduction tool. In controlled experiments, she demonstrated that before 
entering a high stakes meeting, you can substantially reduce stress 
hormones in your blood by simply breathing deeply and slowly while 
assuming a powerful pose (think Wonder Woman or Superman). When 
last minute jitters take over, I’ve found a bathroom stall and used this 
one to great benefit.
Over the years, these tactics have helped me learn to connect in a 
meaningful way with groups, turning once-stressful presentations into 
some of the most gratifying experiences of my life. As I’ve learned to 
get out of my own head, ground myself in more intrinsic sources of 
worth, connect to my deeper motives for sharing, and just breathe, the 
experience of standing in front of an audience is no longer a curse, but a 
blessing to me.
This article was originally published online on August 31, 2015.
Joseph Grenny is the author of the New York Times bestselling 
book, Crucial Conversations. He is also the cofounder of Crucial 
Learning, a learning company that offers courses in the areas of 
communication, performance, and leadership.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  6 Ways to Reduce the Stress of Presenting
Copyright © 2015 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
