Digital Article / Business Communication
What to Do When You’re Losing Your 
Audience During a Presentation
Four tips for when the phones come out. by Dorie Clark
Published on HBR.org  /  September 19, 2019  /  Reprint H0557X
Debra Bardowicks/Getty Images
You can tell when an audience has stopped listening to you during 
a presentation. Phones come out, and attendees surreptitiously text 
underneath the table. Instead of leaning forward and nodding along 
with your points, they begin slouching or tapping their feet. The more 
brazen may even start whispering to one another.
As a speaker, it’s dispiriting when you feel you’re trying to convey 
important information and your audience has obviously lost interest. 
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

But your only chance at being heard is finding a way —somehow — to 
re-engage them.
As a professional speaker who has given more than 300 talks over 
the past half-decade, I’ve addressed plenty of audiences under adverse 
conditions, from the serious (employees smarting from news of an 
impending reorg) to the banal (fighting to be heard over the clank of 
silverware during a lunchtime speaking slot). Here are four strategies 
that have helped me regain control of the room.
First, one of my favorite techniques for reclaiming attention is to move 
to a different part of the stage. Many presenters — hemmed in by the 
standard stage setup — default to delivering their remarks from behind 
a podium. This often feels safer to novice speakers because they have 
a place to stash their notes and don’t feel as exposed. But it means 
missing out on a huge opportunity to leverage your physical presence.
If you’ve been planted in one spot, in front of one part of the audience, 
you can reengage the rest of the group by moving to the opposite side of 
the stage. (Whether out of surprise or politeness, your sudden proximity 
will force attendees to focus on you.) If you’re not on a stage, you can 
take this even further and walk around the room. You don’t want to 
overdo this maneuver, but used judiciously it keeps audience members 
guessing where you’ll go next, which means their eyes are trained on 
you.
Another strategy is to speed up — or slow down — the pace of your 
remarks. Everyone knows that speaking in a monotone voice is deadly. 
But a corollary mistake is that, even if your voice has plenty of range, 
speakers often use the same rate of speech all the time.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What to Do When You’re Losing Your Audience During a Prese…
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Fast speakers barrage their audiences, slow speakers keep drawling, and 
audience members — confident they know what to expect — starts to 
fidget. But when you deliberately change speed, they take note: What’s 
different here? Why does this part sound distinct? And they’ll once again 
focus on your content.
Lowering your voice or pausing can have the same effect. When I want 
an audience to focus on a key point, I’ll deliberately lower my voice to 
a near-whisper, so they need to focus intently in order to understand 
what’s going on. I may even pause in silence for several beats, to the 
point where they’re itching to hear the conclusion. This is especially 
effective if you stop after a rhetorical question. “Winning 40% market 
share might sound unattainable,” you could say. “So how do we do it?” 
A well-timed pause adds just enough suspense that your listeners can’t 
help but anticipate your answer.
So far, we’ve discussed physical techniques for snapping the audience 
back to attention. But these will only have a limited effect if they’re 
zoning out because your material is too dry or technical. The same 
presentation that’s perfect for the engineering department may be way 
too detailed for the broader leadership team, for instance. Thus, a final
technique is to reconnect with the crowd by introducing a story or 
analogy that illustrates your point.
Even if your audience isn’t versed in particular technical specifications,
they can still understand the difference between, say, a regional Amtrak 
versus a high-speed train. Citing a real-world parallel will help you 
make your point in a way everyone grasps (if investing an additional 
$1 million in R&D will get you “high-speed” performance, that may well 
be a compelling proposition).
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What to Do When You’re Losing Your Audience During a Prese…
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Effective speakers ensure that audiences are actually paying attention 
to their remarks. If you truly want to inform, educate, or inspire people, 
you must to learn how to capture their attention and re-engage it when 
necessary. By following these strategies, you can recover more quickly 
from interruptions or distractions and ensure your message is far more 
likely to be heard.
This article was originally published online on September 19, 2019.
Dorie Clark is a marketing strategist and professional speaker 
who teaches at Columbia Business School. She is the author 
of Entrepreneurial You: Monetize Your Expertise, Create Multiple 
Income Streams, and Thrive (Harvard Business Review Press, 2017); 
Stand Out: How to Find Your Breakthrough Idea and Build a 
Following Around It (Portfolio, 2015); Reinventing You: DefineDefine Your 
Brand, Imagine Your Future (Harvard Business Review Press, 2013); 
and The Long Game: How to Be a Long-Term Thinker in a Short-Term 
World (Harvard Business Review Press, 2021).
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  What to Do When You’re Losing Your Audience During a Prese…
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
