Digital 
Article
Business Communication
Structure Your 
Presentation Like a Story
To win people over, create tension between the status quo and a better 
way. by Nancy Duarte
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Structure Your Presentation 
Like a Story
To win people over, create tension between the status quo and a better 
way. by Nancy Duarte
Published on HBR.org  /  October 31, 2012  /  Reprint H009MI
PM Images/Getty Images
After studying hundreds of speeches, I’ve found that the most effectiveeffective
presenters use the same techniques as great storytellers: By reminding 
people of the status quo and then revealing the path to a better way, 
they set up a conflict that needs to be resolved.
That tension helps them persuade the audience to adopt a new mindset 
or behave differently — to move from what is to what could be. And by 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Structure Your Presentation Like a Story
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

following Aristotle’s three-part story structure (beginning, middle, end), 
they create a message that’s easy to digest, remember, and retell.
Here’s how it looks when you chart it out:
And here’s how to do it in your own presentations.
Craft the Beginning
Start by describing life as the audience knows it. People should be 
nodding their heads in recognition because you’re articulating what 
they already understand. This creates a bond between you and them, 
and opens them up to hear your ideas for change.
After you set that baseline of what is, introduce your vision of what 
could be. The gap between the two will throw the audience a bit off
balance, and that’s a good thing — it jars them out of complacency. For 
instance:
What is: We fell short of our Q3 financial goals partly because we’re 
understaffed and everyone’s spread too thin.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Structure Your Presentation Like a Story
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

What could be: But what if we could solve the worst of our problems by 
bringing in a couple of powerhouse clients? Well, we can.
Once you establish that gap, use the rest of the presentation to bridge it
Develop the Middle
Now that people in your audience realize their world is off-kilter, keep 
playing up the contrast between what is and what could be.
Let’s go back to that Q3 update. Revenues are down, but you want 
to motivate employees to make up for it. Here’s one way you could 
structure the middle of your presentation:
What is: We missed our Q3 forecast by 15%.
What could be: Q4 numbers must be strong for us to pay out bonuses.
What is: We have six new clients on our roster.
What could be: Two of them have the potential to bring in more revenue 
than our best clients do now.
What is: The new clients will require extensive retooling in 
manufacturing.
What could be: We’ll be bringing in experts from Germany to help.
As you move back and forth between what is and what could be, the 
audience will find the latter more and more alluring.
Make the Ending Powerful
You don’t want to end with a burdensome list of to-dos. Definitely
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Structure Your Presentation Like a Story
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

include a call to action — but make it inspiring so people will want to 
act. Describe what I call the new bliss: how much better their world will 
be when they adopt your ideas.
So if you’re wrapping up that Q3 update from above, you might 
approach it this way:
Call to action: It will take extra work from all departments to make Q4 
numbers, but we can deliver products to our important new clients on 
time and with no errors.
New bliss: I know everyone’s running on fumes — but hang in there. 
This is our chance to pull together like a championship team, and things 
will get easier if we make this work. The reward if we meet our Q4 
targets? Bonuses, plus days off at the end of the year.
By defining future rewards, you show people that getting on board will 
be worth their effort. It’ll meet their needs, not just yours.
This is the fourth post in Nancy Duarte’s blog series on creating and 
delivering presentations, based on tips from her new book, the HBR Guide 
to Persuasive Presentations.
Read the other posts here:
Post #1: How to Present to Senior Executives
Post #2: Create a Presentation Your Audience Will Care About
Post #3: Do Your Slides Pass the Glance Test
This article was originally published online on October 31, 2012.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Structure Your Presentation Like a Story
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

ND
Nancy Duarte is a best-selling author with thirty years of CEO-ing 
under her belt. She’s driven her firm, Duarte, Inc., to be the global 
leader behind some of the most influential messages and visuals in 
business and culture. Duarte, Inc., is the largest design firm in Silicon 
Valley, as well as one of the top woman-owned businesses in the area. 
Nancy has written six best-selling books, four have won awards, and 
her new book, DataStory: Explain Data and Inspire Action Through 
Story, is available now. Follow Duarte on Twitter: @nancyduarte or 
LinkedIn.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Structure Your Presentation Like a Story
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
