Digital 
Article
Business Communication
Create a Presentation Your 
Audience Will Care About
Brainstorm like crazy — and cut mercilessly. by Nancy Duarte
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Create a Presentation Your 
Audience Will Care About
Brainstorm like crazy — and cut mercilessly. by Nancy Duarte
Published on HBR.org  /  October 10, 2012  /  Reprint H009IP
Generating ideas is the easiest part of creating a presentation. The 
hard part is deciding what to keep. Many of your ideas may be 
fascinating or clever, but you can’t squeeze them all in — and no one 
wants to hear them all, anyway.
The people in the audience are the stars of your show. If they don’t 
buy what you’re saying, it won’t go anywhere. To keep them engaged 
and make your case, you’ll need to focus on what matters to them. 
If you don’t, they’ll have to work hard to figure out why they should 
care about your presentation and what it’ll help them accomplish, and 
they’ll resent you for the extra effort they’ve had to put in.
Spell out the big idea: Your primary filter should be what I call your 
big idea: the one key message you must communicate. Everything in 
your presentation should support that message. The big idea is what 
compels the people in the room to change their thinking or behavior — 
and that’s the whole reason you’re presenting to them in the first place. 
It’s shaped by your point of view and what’s at stake (that is, why the 
audience should embrace your perspective). A generalization like “Q4 
financials” doesn’t cut it. If you don’t have anything of substance to say 
about the financials, why present? Better to send around a spreadsheet 
and be done with it.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Create a Presentation Your Audience Will Care About
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Try expressing your big idea in a complete sentence to make sure it’s 
fully baked. The subject will often be some version of “you,” to highlight 
the audience’s role, and the verb will convey action. Be specific. When 
asked, “What’s your presentation about?” you wouldn’t say, “Software 
updates.” That’s a topic, not a big idea. But you might say, “It’s about 
why production will keep missing key deadlines unless we upgrade our 
workflow management software.”
Once you’ve spelled out your big idea, generate lots of supporting 
material to give yourself more to choose from when it’s time to pick your 
best stuff. Go for quantity — designers call this part of the brainstorming 
process divergent thinking. But then turn your attention to convergent 
thinking, the filtering and sorting that helps you find material that will 
rally your audience behind your big idea.
By the way, you don’t have to start from scratch when generating 
content: Dig up other presentations, industry studies, news articles, 
reports, surveys — anything that’s relevant to your big idea. Push on the 
concepts. Challenge them, or consider them from a new angle, or draw 
new connections. Then brainstorm new content using stickies (they’re 
easy to move and arrange), whiteboards, mind maps, and other tools. At 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Create a Presentation Your Audience Will Care About
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

this stage, more is more, because you may work your way through five,
ten, or even twenty ideas until you find ones that are distinctive and 
memorable.
Wield a sharp hatchet: Once you’ve gathered lots of material, start 
cutting mercilessly on your audience’s behalf. Say you’re presenting a 
business case for developing a new product, and you’ve created a mind 
map in the brainstorming phase to explore issues that could affect the 
product’s success:
Since your priority is to persuade decision makers at your organization 
to invest in your idea, you’ll want to talk about what they’ll be interested 
in: its profit and revenue potential, for example, and how you envision 
managing market and technological risks. But you probably don’t need 
to get into trends such as agility and serendipity. Though they’re 
important principles in the world of product development, they’d be 
a distraction in this particular talk. Save them for another presentation. 
This is the second post in Nancy Duarte’s blog series on creating and 
delivering presentations, based on tips from her new book, the HBR Guide 
to Persuasive Presentations.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Create a Presentation Your Audience Will Care About
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Read the other posts here:
Post #1: How to Present to Senior Executives
Post #3: Do Your Slides Pass the Glance Test?
Post #4: Structure Your Presentation Like a Story
This article was originally published online on October 10, 2012.
ND
Nancy Duarte is a best-selling author with thirty years of CEO-ing 
under her belt. She’s driven her firm, Duarte, Inc., to be the global 
leader behind some of the most influential messages and visuals in 
business and culture. Duarte, Inc., is the largest design firm in Silicon 
Valley, as well as one of the top woman-owned businesses in the area. 
Nancy has written six best-selling books, four have won awards, and 
her new book, DataStory: Explain Data and Inspire Action Through 
Story, is available now. Follow Duarte on Twitter: @nancyduarte or 
LinkedIn.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Create a Presentation Your Audience Will Care About
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
