Digital Article / Business Communication
How to Elevate Your Presence in a 
Virtual Meeting
Six tips for making an impact from a distance. by Joel Schwartzberg
Published on HBR.org  /  April 8, 2020  /  Reprint H05IOV
Illustration by Michał Bednarski
Even before the COVID-19 crisis started, 5.3% of Americans — more 
than 8.2 million people — worked from home, according to a 2018 
U.S. Census report. And with the outbreak turning more office workers 
into work-from-home employees, video conferences are becoming more 
routine for a wide range of business purposes, from staff meetings to 
brainstorming sessions to major announcements.
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

But communication tactics that work well among colleagues in a 
conference room may not translate seamlessly to Brady-Bunch-style 
quadrants on a computer screen. Organizational behavior professor 
Andy Molinsky recommends seeing virtual meetings as “an entirely 
different context, not simply an in-person meeting or a class on a 
screen.”
Elevating both your point and your presence in a Zoom, Skype, or 
similar virtual meeting, requires not only engaging in video conference-
friendly tactics but also disabusing yourself of potentially detrimental 
misconceptions about the medium.
To help keep your impact actual when your presence is virtual, consider 
these six recommendations:
1. Focus on your camera, not your colleagues
Every presentation coach will tell you that direct eye contact is a vital 
way to reinforce your point. In a video conference, this means looking 
into the video camera, not at the smiling faces of Marcia, Greg, Cindy, 
Peter, Jan, and Bobby. Speaking into a cold black circle will not feel 
natural or comfortable — as humans, we’re trained to look at the people 
we’re talking to — but know that entertainers and politicians have been 
doing it for decades.
It’s challenging to focus on your camera for an entire meeting — 
especially while others are talking — but know that you increase the 
impact of your points when you look deep into the dot.
Practice looking into your camera during video conferences when 
you speak, even for brief moments. The more you use it, the more 
comfortable you’ll become with it.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Elevate Your Presence in a Virtual Meeting
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

2. Maintain a strong voice
I always counsel my students and clients to use a louder-than-usual 
voice because, in addition to being audible, strong voices convey 
authority, credibility, and confidence. This concept is just as true in 
virtual conferences as it is in actual ones. So even though you’re using 
an external or internal microphone and thus may be tempted to speak at 
a conversational volume, maintain a strong, clear voice as if you’re in a 
large conference room.
Using a loud voice will also keep you from mumbling and from speaking 
too quickly due to the amount of breath required.
3. Frame yourself wisely
Proximity plays a big part in how audiences perceive you as a 
communicator. The farther away or more obscured you appear, the less 
engaging you will be. In a video conference, your head and the top of 
your shoulders should dominate the screen.
If your head is cut offo  at the top or bottom, you’re too close. If your entire 
torso is in view, you’re too far away. If only half of your head is in sight, 
please adjust the camera.
Also be mindful of your background. Cluttered rooms make 
communicators seem disorganized. Distracting elements will pull 
attention away from you. Find an environment where the background is 
simple, reflecting your professionalism.
Preparation is critical, so take time before the meeting to pick your 
location and put your head fully in frame to ensure you’re putting your 
best face forward.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Elevate Your Presence in a Virtual Meeting
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

4. Be present and mindful
In a conventional meeting, participants are typically very mindful of 
their presence. But in a video conference where you’re muted (and 
maybe in your pajama pants), it’s easy to forget you’re still being 
watched. You may be tempted to check your email or attend to other 
work, but multi-tasking is perilous because you don’t want to be caught 
unprepared if asked a sudden question.
Even if you don’t need to be fully engaged in the meeting, your 
professional reputation can suffer if it even looks like you’re not paying 
attention. So close those other windows, turn your phone upside down, 
and remember that you’re always “on camera.”
Because you’re less aware of social cues in a virtual meeting, it’s also 
important to be mindful of how long and how often you speak, if you 
interrupt other people, and if you make a comment that might offend
someone present but out of sight. My advice: Don’t consider yourself “at 
home.” Consider yourself “at work.” Your behavior may follow.
5. Don’t become your own distraction
In a live meeting, you never have to worry about talking while muted, 
annoying ambient noise, or the interference of pets and children. But 
these are all common pitfalls of virtual meetings, and they can quickly 
sabotage your point. Your job is to make sure you’re remembered for 
what you did right, not what went wrong, so be mindful of the power 
you have over both your virtual and physical environments.
Start by training yourself to stay on mute whenever you’re not speaking 
and unmuting yourself only when you do speak. Staying on mute shuts 
out sudden noises as well as routine noises you may not be aware of, like 
the ticking of a wall clock, the clickety-clack of your typing, or even your 
own breathing. Unmuting yourself obviously enables you to speak, but 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Elevate Your Presence in a Virtual Meeting
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

— perhaps more importantly — saves you from being on the receiving 
end of the embarrassing colleague chorus, “You’re on mute!”
Make sure to turn offo  your camera when you’re doing something visually 
distracting as well, such as moving to another room or eating. (Drinking 
is not very distracting, but chewing is another story).
Finally, if boisterous children (or pets) want to participate in your call, 
your colleagues will probably laugh or relate, so don’t be worried about 
or embarrassed by spontaneous distractions. However, if you’re tasked 
with giving a major presentation, try to have someone supervise them 
in another room, far from the temptation of your presence, or at least 
create an engrossing activity for them. Parenting and presenting cannot 
happen simultaneously, and truly important messages require not only 
your colleagues’ full attention, but yours as well.
6. Use the chat window as your partner
Consider the chat window as not just a discussion platform, but a 
presentational appendage. When you refer to an article or shared 
document, link to it in the chat. If you run the meeting, put a link to 
the agenda in the chat. When others are speaking, respond with support 
or questions in the chat. The chat window is a unique opportunity in 
virtual meetings to elevate your presence, add dimensions to your ideas, 
and demonstrate that you’re fully present.
Whether you’ve been participating in virtual meetings for years or just 
started this month, it’s important to realize that a video conference 
isn’t just a conference over video — it’s an entirely new interactive 
experience, which requires adapting your perspective, habits, and 
tactics to make it work effectively for you.
This article was originally published online on April 8, 2020.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Elevate Your Presence in a Virtual Meeting
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

JS
Joel Schwartzberg oversees executive communications for a major 
national nonprofit, is a professional presentation coach, and is the 
author of Get to the Point! Sharpen Your Message and Make Your 
Words Matter and The Language of Leadership: How to Engage and 
Inspire Your Team. You can find him on LinkedIn and X.
@TheJoelTruth
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Elevate Your Presence in a Virtual Meeting
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
6
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
