HBR.ORG
JUNE 2016 
REPRINT R1606H
Visualizations That 
Really Work
Know what message you’re trying to communicate  
before you get down in the weeds. 
by Scott Berinato
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

KNOW  
WHAT  
MESSAGE  
YOU’RE  
TRYING  
TO  
COMMUNICATE  
BEFORE  
YOU  
GET 
DOWN  
IN  
THE  
WEEDS.
BY 
SCOTT 
BERINATO
2 Harvard Business Review June 2016
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Scott Berinato is a senior 
editor at HBR and the author 
of Good Charts: The HBR 
Guide to Making Smarter, 
More Persuasive Data 
Visualizations (2016), from 
which this article is adapted. 
June 2016 Harvard Business Review 3
FOR ARTICLE REPRINTS CALL 800-988-0886 OR 617-783-7500, OR VISIT HBR.ORG
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Data is the primary force behind this shift. 
Decision making increasingly relies on data, which 
comes at us with such overwhelming velocity, and 
in such volume, that we can’t comprehend it with‑
out some layer of abstraction, such as a visual one. 
A typical example: At Boeing the managers of the 
Osprey program need to improve the efficiency of 
the aircraft’s takeoffs and landings. But each time 
the Osprey gets off the ground or touches back 
down, its sensors create a terabyte of data. Ten take‑
offs and landings produce as much data as is held in 
the Library of Congress. Without visualization, de‑
tecting the inefficiencies hidden in the patterns and 
anomalies of that data would be an impossible slog. 
But even information that’s not statistical de‑
mands visual expression. Complex systems—busi‑
ness process workflows, for example, or the way 
customers move through a store—are hard to un‑
derstand, much less fix, if you can’t first see them. 
Thanks to the internet and a growing number of 
affordable tools, translating information into visuals 
is now easy (and cheap) for everyone, regardless of 
data skills or design skills. This is largely a positive 
development. One drawback, though, is that it re‑
inforces the impulse to “click and viz” without first 
thinking about your purpose and goals. Convenient 
is a tempting replacement for good, but it will lead 
to charts that are merely adequate or, worse, inef‑
fective. Automatically converting spreadsheet cells 
into a chart only visualizes pieces of a spreadsheet; 
it doesn’t capture an idea. As the presentation ex‑
pert Nancy Duarte puts it, “Don’t project the idea 
that you’re showing a chart. Project the idea that 
you’re showing a reflection of human activity, of 
things people did to make a line go up and down. 
It’s not ‘Here are our Q3 financial results,’ it’s ‘Here’s 
where we missed our targets.’” 
Managers who want to get better at making 
charts often start by learning rules. When should 
I use a bar chart? How many colors are too many? 
Where should the key go? Do I have to start my 
y‑axis at zero? Visual grammar is important and 
useful—but knowing it doesn’t guarantee that you’ll 
make good charts. To start with chart-making rules 
is to forgo strategy for execution; it’s to pack for a 
trip without knowing where you’re going. 
Your visual communication will prove far more 
successful if you begin by acknowledging that it is 
not a lone action but, rather, several activities, each 
of which requires distinct types of planning, re‑
sources, and skills. The typology I offer here was 
created as a reaction to my making the very mistake 
I just described: The book from which this article is 
adapted started out as something like a rule book. 
ot long ago, the ability to create 
smart data visualizations, or 
dataviz, was a nice-to-have skill. 
For the most part, it benefited 
design- and data-minded 
managers who made a deliberate 
decision to invest in acquiring 
it. That’s changed. Now visual 
communication is a must-have skill 
for all managers, because more 
and more often, it’s the only way to 
make sense of the work they do.
VISUALIZATIONS THAT REALLY WORK
4 Harvard Business Review June 2016
COPYRIGHT © 2016 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

But after exploring the history of visualization, the 
exciting state of visualization research, and smart 
ideas from experts and pioneers, I reconsidered 
the project. We didn’t need another rule book; we 
needed a way to think about the increasingly crucial 
discipline of visual communication as a whole.
The typology described in this article is simple. 
By answering just two questions, you can set your‑
self up to succeed. 
The Two Questions 
To start thinking visually, consider the nature and 
purpose of your visualization:
Is the information conceptual or data-driven?
Am I declaring something or exploring something?
If you know the answers to these questions, you 
can plan what resources and tools you’ll need and 
begin to discern what type of visualization will help 
you achieve your goals most effectively. 
CONCEPTUAL
DATA-DRIVEN
FOCUS
IDEAS
STATISTICS
GOALS
SIMPLIFY, TEACH
“Here’s how our 
organization  
is structured.”
INFORM, ENLIGHTEN
“Here are our revenues 
for the past two years.”
The first question is the simpler of the two, and 
the answer is usually obvious. Either you’re visual‑
izing qualitative information or you’re plotting quan‑
titative information: ideas or statistics. But notice 
that the question is about the information itself, not 
the forms you might ultimately use to show it. For 
example, the classic Gartner Hype Cycle (see above 
right) uses a traditionally data-driven form—a line 
chart—but no actual data. It’s a concept.
PEAK OF INFLATED 
EXPECTATIONS
PLATEAU OF 
PRODUCTIVITY
SLOPE OF 
ENLIGHTENMENT
TROUGH OF 
DISILLUSIONMENT
TIME
TECHNOLOGY 
TRIGGER
VISIBILITY
HYPE CYCLE FOR EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
If the first question identifies what you have, the 
second elicits what you’re doing: either communi‑
cating information (declarative) or trying to figure 
something out (exploratory).
DECLARATIVE
EXPLORATORY
FOCUS
DOCUMENTING, 
DESIGNING
PROTOTYPING, ITERATING, 
INTERACTING, AUTOMATING
GOALS
AFFIRM 
“Here is our 
budget by 
department.”
CONFIRM 
“Let’s see if marketing 
investments contributed 
to rising profits.”
DISCOVER 
“What would we see  
if we visualized customer  
purchases by gender, 
location, and purchase 
amount in real time?”
 
Managers most often work with declarative visu‑
alizations, which make a statement, usually to an au‑
dience in a formal setting. If you have a spreadsheet 
workbook full of sales data and you’re using it to 
show quarterly sales in a presentation, your purpose 
is declarative.
Idea in Brief
CONTEXT
Knowledge workers need 
greater visual literacy than 
they used to, because so much 
data—and so many ideas—are 
now presented graphically.  
But few of us have been taught 
data-visualization skills. 
TOOLS ARE FINE…
Inexpensive tools allow 
anyone to perform simple 
tasks such as importing 
spreadsheet data into a bar 
chart. But that means it’s 
easy to create terrible charts. 
Visualization can be so much 
more: It’s an agile, powerful 
way to explore ideas and 
communicate information. 
…BUT STRATEGY IS KEY
Don’t jump straight to 
execution. Instead, first 
think about what you’re 
representing—ideas or  
data? Then consider your 
purpose: Do you want to 
inform, persuade, or explore? 
The answers will suggest  
what tools and resources  
you need.
June 2016 Harvard Business Review 5
FOR ARTICLE REPRINTS CALL 800-988-0886 OR 617-783-7500, OR VISIT HBR.ORG
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

But let’s say your boss wants to understand why 
the sales team’s performance has lagged lately. You 
suspect that seasonal cycles have caused the dip, but 
you’re not sure. Now your purpose is exploratory, 
and you’ll use the same data to create visuals that 
will confirm or refute your hypothesis. The audi‑
ence is usually yourself or a small team. If your hy‑
pothesis is confirmed, you may well show your boss 
a declarative visualization, saying, “Here’s what’s 
happening to sales.” 
Exploratory visualizations are actually of two 
kinds. In the example above, you were testing a hy‑
pothesis. But suppose you don’t have an idea about 
why performance is lagging—you don’t know what 
you’re looking for. You want to mine your work‑
book to see what patterns, trends, and anomalies 
emerge. What will you see, for example, when you 
measure sales performance in relation to the size of 
the region a salesperson manages? What happens 
if you compare seasonal trends in various geogra‑
phies? How does weather affect sales? Such data 
brainstorming can deliver fresh insights. Big stra‑
tegic questions—Why are revenues falling? Where 
can we find efficiencies? How do customers inter‑
act with us?—can benefit from a discovery-focused 
exploratory visualization. 
The Four Types
CONCEPTUAL
DATA-DRIVEN
DECLARATIVE
EXPLORATORY
IDEA ILLUSTRATION
IDEA GENERATION
EVERYDAY DATAVIZ
VISUAL DISCOVERY
The nature and purpose questions combine in a 
classic 2×2 to define four types of visual commu‑
nication: idea illustration, idea generation, visual 
discovery, and everyday dataviz.
IDEA ILLUSTRATION
INFO TYPE 
PROCESS, FRAMEWORK
TYPICAL SETTING
PRESENTATIONS, TEACHING
PRIMARY SKILLS
DESIGN, EDITING
GOALS
LEARNING, SIMPLIFYING, EXPLAINING
We might call this quadrant the “consul‑
tants’ corner.” Consultants can’t resist pro‑
cess diagrams, cycle diagrams, and the like. 
At their best, idea illustrations clarify complex ideas 
by drawing on our ability to understand metaphors 
(trees, bridges) and simple design conventions (cir‑
cles, hierarchies). Org charts and decision trees are 
classic examples of idea illustration. So is the 2×2 
that frames this article. 
Idea illustration demands clear and simple de‑
sign, but its reliance on metaphor invites unneces‑
sary adornment. Because the discipline and bound‑
aries of data sets aren’t built in to idea illustration, 
they must be imposed. The focus should be on 
clear communication, structure, and the logic of 
the ideas. The most useful skills here are similar to 
what a text editor brings to a manuscript—the abil‑
ity to pare things down to their essence. Some de‑
sign skills will be useful too, whether they’re your 
own or hired.
Suppose a company engages consultants to 
help its R&D group find inspiration in other indus‑
tries. The consultants use a technique called the 
pyramid search—a way to get information from ex‑
perts in other fields close to your own, who point 
you to the top experts in their fields, who point you 
to experts in still other fields, who then help you 
find the experts in those fields, and so on. 
It’s actually tricky to explain, so the consultants 
may use visualization to help. How does a pyramid 
search work? It looks something like this:
CLIMBING PYRAMIDS IN SEARCH OF IDEAS
Ü
CONTEXTUAL DISTANCE
LEVEL OF EXPERTISE
Target ﬁeld
Analogous ﬁeld 1
Analogous ﬁeld 2
Expert
Top expert
Top expert
Expert
Expert
Referral 4
Referral 2
Referral 1
Referral 3
6 Harvard Business Review June 2016
VISUALIZATIONS THAT REALLY WORK
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

design thinking—gathering as many diverse points 
of view and visual approaches as possible before 
homing in on one and refining it. Jon Kolko, the 
founder and director of the Austin Center for 
Design and the author of Well-Designed: How to Use 
Empathy to Create Products People Love, fills the 
whiteboard walls of his office with conceptual, ex‑
ploratory visualizations. “It’s our go-to method for 
thinking through complexity,” he says. “Sketching 
is this effort to work through ambiguity and mud‑
diness and come to crispness.” Managers who are 
good at leading teams, facilitating brainstorming 
sessions, and encouraging and then capturing cre‑
ative thinking will do well in this quadrant. Design 
skills and editing are less important here, and 
sometimes counterproductive. When you’re seek‑
ing breakthroughs, editing is the opposite of what 
you need, and you should think in rapid sketches; 
refined designs will just slow you down.
Suppose a marketing team is holding an off-site. 
The team members need to come up with a way to 
show executives their proposed strategy for going 
upmarket. An hourlong whiteboard session yields 
several approaches and ideas (none of which are 
erased) for presenting the strategy. Ultimately, one 
approach gains purchase with the team, which 
thinks it best captures the key point: Get fewer cus‑
tomers to spend much more. The whiteboard looks 
something like this: 
The axes use conventions that we can grasp im‑
mediately: industries plotted near to far and exper‑
tise mapped low to high. The pyramid shape itself 
shows the relative rarity of top experts compared 
with lower-level ones. Words in the title—“climbing” 
and “pyramids”—help us grasp the idea quickly. 
Finally, the designer didn’t succumb to a tempta‑
tion to decorate: The pyramids aren’t literal, three-
dimensional, sandstone-colored objects. 
Too often, idea illustration doesn’t go that well, 
and you end up with something like this:
HOW A PYRAMID SEARCH WORKS
Referral 1
Target
ﬁeld
Analogous
ﬁeld 1
Analogous
ﬁeld 2
Analogous
ﬁeld 3
Target
ﬁeld
CONTEXTUAL DISTANCE
Analogous
ﬁeld 1
Analogous
ﬁeld 2
Analogous
ﬁeld 3
Expert
Top expert
Expert
Top expert
Expert
Referral 2
Referral 3
Referral 4
Here the color gradient, the drop shadows, and 
the 3-D pyramids distract us from the idea. The ar‑
rows don’t actually demonstrate how a pyramid 
search works. And experts and top experts are placed 
on the same plane instead of at different heights to 
convey relative status.
IDEA GENERATION
INFO TYPE 
COMPLEX, UNDEFINED
TYPICAL SETTING
WORKING SESSION, BRAINSTORMING
PRIMARY SKILLS
TEAM-BUILDING, FACILITATION
GOALS
PROBLEM SOLVING, DISCOVERY, INNOVATION
Managers may not think of visualization as 
a tool to support idea generation, but they 
use it to brainstorm all the time—on white‑
boards, on butcher paper, or, classically, on the back 
of a napkin. Like idea illustration, idea generation 
relies on conceptual metaphors, but it takes place in 
more-informal settings, such as off-sites, strategy 
sessions, and early-phase innovation projects. It’s 
used to find new ways of seeing how the business 
works and to answer complex managerial chal‑
lenges: restructuring an organization, coming up 
with a new business process, codifying a system for 
making decisions.
Although idea generation can be done alone, 
it benefits from collaboration and borrows from 
June 2016 Harvard Business Review 7
FOR ARTICLE REPRINTS CALL 800-988-0886 OR 617-783-7500, OR VISIT HBR.ORG
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

prototyping that allows you to rapidly iterate on the 
dataviz. Some skill at manipulating spreadsheets 
and knowledge of programs or sites that enable swift 
prototyping are useful here. 
Of course, visuals that emerge from idea gen‑
eration often lead to more formally designed and 
presented idea illustrations. 
VISUAL DISCOVERY
INFO TYPE 
BIG DATA, COMPLEX, DYNAMIC
TYPICAL SETTING
WORKING SESSIONS, TESTING, ANALYSIS
PRIMARY SKILLS
BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE, PROGRAMMING, 
PAIRED ANALYSIS
GOALS
TREND SPOTTING, SENSE MAKING,  
DEEP ANALYSIS
This is the most complicated quadrant, be‑
cause in truth it holds two categories. 
Recall that we originally separated explor‑
atory purposes into two kinds: testing a hypothesis 
and mining for patterns, trends, and anomalies. The 
former is focused, whereas the latter is more flexible. 
The bigger and more complex the data, and the less 
you know going in, the more open-ended the work. 
CONCEPTUAL
DATA-DRIVEN
EXPLORATORY
DECLARATIVE
IDEA ILLUSTRATION
IDEA GENERATION
EVERYDAY DATAVIZ
VISUAL CONFIRMATION
VISUAL EXPLORATION
VISUAL DISCOVERY
Visual confirmation. You’re answering one of 
two questions with this kind of project: Is what I 
suspect actually true? or What are some other ways 
of depicting this idea?
The scope of the data tends to be manageable, 
and the chart types you’re likely to use are com‑
mon—although when trying to depict things in new 
ways, you may venture into some less-common 
types. Confirmation usually doesn’t happen in a for‑
mal setting; it’s the work you do to find the charts 
you want to create for presentations. That means 
your time will shift away from design and toward 
1
3
2
4
8 Harvard Business Review June 2016
VISUALIZATIONS THAT REALLY WORK
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Anmol Garg, a data scientist at Tesla Motors, has 
used visual exploration to tap into the vast amount 
of sensor data the company’s cars produce. Garg 
created an interactive chart that shows the pres‑
sure in a car’s tires over time. In true exploratory 
form, he and his team first created the visualiza‑
tions and then found a variety of uses for them: to 
see whether tires are properly inflated when a car 
leaves the factory, how often customers reinflate 
them, and how long customers take to respond to a 
low-pressure alert; to find leak rates; and to do some 
predictive modeling on when tires are likely to go 
flat. The pressure of all four tires is visualized on a 
scatter plot, which, however inscrutable to a general 
audience, is clear to its intended audience. 
Garg was exploring data to find insights that 
could be gleaned only through visuals. “We’re 
dealing with terabytes of data all the time,” he says. 
“You can’t find anything looking at spreadsheets and 
querying databases. It has to be visual.” For pre‑
sentations to the executive team, Garg translates 
these exploration sessions into the kinds of simpler 
charts discussed below. “Management loves seeing 
visualizations,” he says.
EVERYDAY DATAVIZ 
INFO TYPE 
SIMPLE, LOW VOLUME
TYPICAL SETTING
FORMAL, PRESENTATIONS
PRIMARY SKILLS
DESIGN, STORYTELLING
GOALS
AFFIRMING, SETTING CONTEXT
Whereas data scientists do most of the 
work on visual exploration, managers do 
most of the work on everyday visualiza‑
tions. This quadrant comprises the basic charts and 
graphs you normally paste from a spreadsheet into a 
presentation. They are usually simple—line charts, 
bar charts, pies, and scatter plots.
Suppose a marketing manager believes that at 
certain times of the day more customers shop his site 
on mobile devices than on desktops, but his market‑
ing programs aren’t designed to take advantage of 
that. He loads some data into an online tool (called 
Datawrapper) to see if he’s right (1 at left).
He can’t yet confirm or refute his hypothesis. He 
can’t tell much of anything, but he’s prototyping and 
using a tool that makes it easy to try different views 
into the data. He works fast; design is not a concern. 
He tries a line chart instead of a bar chart (2).
Now he’s seeing something, but working with 
three variables still doesn’t quite get at the mobile-
versus-desktop view he wants, so he tries again with 
two variables (3). Each time he iterates, he evaluates 
whether he can confirm his original hypothesis: At 
certain times of day more customers are shopping on 
mobile devices than on desktops.
On the fourth try he zooms in and confirms his 
hypothesis (4). 
New software tools mean this type of visualiza‑
tion is easier than ever before: They’re making data 
analysts of us all.
Visual exploration. Open-ended data-driven 
visualizations tend to be the province of data sci‑
entists and business intelligence analysts, although 
new tools have begun to engage general managers 
in visual exploration. It’s exciting to try, because  
it often produces insights that can’t be gleaned  
any other way.
Because we don’t know what we’re looking for, 
these visuals tend to plot data more inclusively. In 
extreme cases, this kind of project may combine 
multiple data sets or load dynamic, real-time data 
into a system that updates automatically. Statistical 
modeling benefits from visual exploration.
Exploration also lends itself to interactivity: 
Managers can adjust parameters, inject new data 
sources, and continually revisualize. Complex data 
sometimes also suits specialized and unusual visu‑
alization, such as force-directed diagrams that show 
how networks cluster, or topographical plots. 
Function trumps form here: Analytical, pro‑
gramming, data management, and business intel‑
ligence skills are more crucial than the ability to 
create presentable charts. Not surprisingly, this 
half of the quadrant is where managers are most 
likely to call in experts to help set up systems to 
wrangle data and create visualizations that fit their 
analytic goals. 
June 2016 Harvard Business Review 9
FOR ARTICLE REPRINTS CALL 800-988-0886 OR 617-783-7500, OR VISIT HBR.ORG
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

on paper or on a personal-device screen, for some‑
one who’s not expected to listen to a presentation 
while trying to take in so much information. For ex‑
ample, health care policy makers might benefit from 
seeing this chart in advance of a hearing at which 
they’ll discuss these long-term trends.
Our VP needs something cleaner for her context. 
She could make her point as simply as this: 
ANNUAL GROWTH IN HEALTH CARE SPENDING
2003
ANNUAL GROWTH IS DECLINING
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
+10%
8.6%
3.6%
8
6
4
2
Simplicity like this takes some discipline—and 
courage—to achieve. The impulse is to include ev‑
erything you know. Busy charts communicate the 
idea that you’ve been just that—busy. “Look at all the 
data I have and the work I’ve done,” they seem to say. 
But that’s not the VP’s goal. She wants to persuade 
her colleagues to invest in new programs. With this 
chart, she won’t have to utter a word for the execu‑
tive team to understand the trend. She has clearly 
established a foundation for her recommendations. 
IN SOME WAYS, “data visualization” is a terrible term. It 
seems to reduce the construction of good charts to a 
mechanical procedure. It evokes the tools and meth‑
odology required to create rather than the creation 
itself. It’s like calling Moby-Dick a “word sequential‑
ization” or The Starry Night a “pigment distribution.”
It also reflects an ongoing obsession in the data‑
viz world with process over outcomes. Visualization 
is merely a process. What we actually do when we 
make a good chart is get at some truth and move 
people to feel it—to see what couldn’t be seen before. 
To change minds. To cause action. 
Some basic common grammar will improve our 
ability to communicate visually. But good outcomes 
require a broader understanding and a strategic ap‑
proach—which the typology described here is meant 
to help you develop. 
HBR Reprint R1606H
“Simple” is the key. Ideally, the visualization will 
communicate a single message, charting only a few 
variables. And the goal is straightforward: affirming 
and setting context. Simplicity is primarily a design 
challenge, so design skills are important. Clarity and 
consistency make these charts most effective in the 
setting where they’re typically used: a formal pre‑
sentation. In a presentation, time is constrained. A 
poorly designed chart will waste that time by pro‑
voking questions that require the presenter to in‑
terpret information that’s meant to be obvious. If an 
everyday dataviz can’t speak for itself, it has failed—
just like a joke whose punch line has to be explained.
That’s not to say that declarative charts shouldn’t 
generate discussion. But the discussion should be 
about the idea in the chart, not the chart itself.
Suppose an HR VP will be presenting to the rest of 
the executive committee about the company’s health 
care costs. She wants to convey that the growth of 
these costs has slowed significantly, creating an op‑
portunity to invest in additional health care services.
The VP has read an online report about this trend 
that includes a link to some government data. She 
downloads the data and clicks on the line chart op‑
tion in Excel. She has her viz in a few seconds. But 
because this is for a presentation, she asks a designer 
colleague to add detail from the data set to give a 
more comprehensive view.
+14%
+12%
+10%
+8%
+6%
+4%
+2%
0%
-2%
-4%
-6%
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
PERCENTAGE CHANGE OVER PREVIOUS YEAR
CHANGE IN HEALTH SPENDING AND GDP
SOURCE: ALTARUM
National Health Spending
GDP
This is a well-designed, accurate chart, but it’s 
probably not the right one. The executive commit‑
tee doesn’t need two decades’ worth of historical 
context to discuss the company’s strategy for em‑
ployee benefits investments. The point the VP wants 
to make is that cost increases have slowed over the 
past few years. Is that clearly communicated here?
In general, when it takes more than a few seconds 
to digest the data in a chart, the chart will work better 
10 Harvard Business Review June 2016
VISUALIZATIONS THAT REALLY WORK
FOR ARTICLE REPRINTS CALL 800-988-0886 OR 617-783-7500, OR VISIT HBR.ORG
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
