Digital Article / Presentation Skills
Create a Conversation, Not a 
Presentation
You and your audience should reach a conclusion together. by John Coleman
Published on HBR.org  /  July 29, 2015  /  Reprint H0281B
Nicholas Blechman for HBR
When I worked as a consultant, I was perennially guilty of “the great 
unveil” in presentations—that tendency to want to save key findings for 
the last moment and then reveal them, expecting a satisfying moment 
of awe. My team and I would work tirelessly to drive to the right answer 
to an organization’s problem. We’d craft an intricate presentation, 
perfecting it right up until minutes or hours before a client meeting, 
and then we’d triumphantly enter the room with a thick stack of hard 
copy PowerPoint slides, often still warm from the printer.
Copyright © 2015 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

But no matter how perfect our presentation looked on the surface, we 
regularly came across major issues when we were in the room. These 
one-sided expositions frequently led to anemic conversations. And this 
hurt our effectiveness as a team and as colleagues and advisers to our 
clients.
The last-minute nature of the unveiling meant that our clients (or 
internal teammates to whom we were presenting) did not have time to 
fully understand the information and were not prepared to participate 
in discussion. This made our problem-solving, and consequently, 
our solutions worse. Group intelligence typically trumps individual 
intelligence, and the insights our clients and teammates could have 
added with further reflection would have improved our results 
tremendously.
The great unveil—particularly when unaccompanied by careful pre-
discussions with the members of the client team—would also lead us 
to make interpersonal and organizational mistakes. Team members, 
seeing a controversial solution for the first time, would become 
defensive. We’d miss problems, or solutions that had already been tried 
and failed, and if someone brought these up in the middle of our 
presentation, we’d end up distracted and confused.
When we created a perfect solution in isolation and made it “ours” to 
present, we ignored the fact that each individual needed to arrive at the 
conclusions independently to really understand it, to believe in it, and 
to be willing to work hard to execute it.
And frankly, relying entirely on the presentation made for boring 
meetings. No one wants to sit and listen to another person present for 
hours on end. People want to ask questions and to provide their own 
insights. They want to problem-solve and debate.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Create a Conversation, Not a Presentation
Copyright © 2015 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

We’re all familiar with these issues, and yet the tendency toward 
“the great unveil” presentation style persists. If we want to foster 
conversations rather than presentations, what are some effective ways 
to do so?
First, draft the materials in careful partnership with important 
members of the audience. Often the best way to start problem-solving 
is simply to have an initial discussion with everyone involved and get 
their thoughts on the issues and potential outcomes in play. This helps 
surface the broadest array of topics and allows everyone to feel heard 
and included. Then, as the problem-solving evolves, work with these 
team members consistently at key checkpoints to review the latest 
information and get their thoughts. Keep them informed throughout 
the process so that at the end of it, there are no surprises in the room.
Second, design a presentation that invites insight and discussion. For 
most meetings, you want presentations that have enough detail to be 
read and understood in advance. You want to include key insights on 
most pages, along with call-out questions for discussion to keep readers 
thinking critically about the issues in play. Finally, use “punchline first”
first” communication. If you start the presentation with an executive 
summary that lists key conclusions, your counterparts can keep those 
conclusions in mind, testing them as they encounter the more in-depth 
information throughout the presentation.
Third, send the “final” materials well in advance of any group 
discussion and require a pre-read. If you show up to the meeting with 
a warm deck that no one has seen, most thoughtful people will spend 
their time in the meeting trying to read and absorb it, even if you’re 
describing the material in detail in person. This is particularly true 
of introverts and others who prefer time to absorb information before 
speaking about it and drawing their own conclusions. Requiring a pre-
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Create a Conversation, Not a Presentation
Copyright © 2015 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

read and offering a few days over which to accomplish it guarantees that 
everyone has an opportunity to fully consider a presentation in advance 
of the meeting.
Fourth, avoid marching through any document page-by-page, and 
disperse responsibility for leading components of the discussion. If 
everyone has prepared, they will be more informed—but they’ll also 
disengage if you then try to painstakingly read every word. The best 
approach is to appoint someone to facilitate the conversation, then have 
that person or others discuss the executive summary, any crucial ideas 
within the text, and open the dialogue. The presentation or document 
you’ve routed then becomes a reference for points of conversation. 
This works even better when several people help introduce the key 
facts rather than one lone presenter—establishing the environment for 
inclusive discussion.
Finally, appoint facilitators to draw out comments and questions from 
the whole group. If one or two people are primarily responsible for the 
project or viewed as the senior people or leaders in the room, have them 
ask questions of the group and assure that everyone’s voice is heard. 
This can be formulaic by surveying each person about key conclusions 
one-by-one, or with adept facilitators, it can be more free-flowing,
drawing out opinions from various people as the conversation develops.
Communication between groups of people is most effective when 
participants are engaged, and the discussion is both inclusive and 
collaborative. Creating an ethos of conversation, rather than a one-sided 
presentation, for critical discussions can better leverage the collective 
intelligence of the team, make solutions to organizational problems 
better and more comprehensive, and improve ownership for execution 
of ideas.
This article was originally published online on July 29, 2015.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Create a Conversation, Not a Presentation
Copyright © 2015 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

JC
John Coleman is the author of the HBR Guide to Crafting Your 
Purpose (Harvard Business Review Press, 2022).
@johnwcoleman
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Create a Conversation, Not a Presentation
Copyright © 2015 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
