Digital 
Article
Business Communication
Breathing Is the Key to 
Persuasive Public Speaking
An overlooked way to sound more authoritative. by Allison Shapira
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Breathing Is the Key to 
Persuasive Public Speaking
An overlooked way to sound more authoritative. by Allison Shapira
Published on HBR.org  /  June 30, 2015  /  Reprint H026N4
Have you ever wondered why two people can say exactly the same thing 
in a meeting, but only one of them gets credit for it? Many times it’s 
the way we sound that makes the difference between whether or not we 
are actually heard.
We all know when someone sounds nervous or confident. Think about 
the following phrase hesitantly uttered, “I have something to say?” 
versus the same message confidently declared, “I have something to 
say.” Click here to hear the difference — both instances are my own 
voice, yet the differences are striking. Which voice do you want your 
employees to use when speaking to clients?
We’ve heard a lot of discussion recently about uptalk (when our 
statements sound like questions) and vocal fry (when our voice is low 
and scratchy, especially at the ends of sentences). These challenges are 
constantly attributed to female speakers, but I hear them in both men 
and women — and the solution to both of them is deeper breathing.
As a former opera singer, I know how much breathing affects how a 
voice sounds. Singers must use deep breathing in order to project a 
strong voice across a crowded auditorium to reach every single person 
in the audience. I never thought that this skill would help me once I left 
the field of opera — until I had to give my first speech. Then, I realized 
how much my operatic training made me a powerful public speaker.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Breathing Is the Key to Persuasive Public Speaking
Copyright © 2015 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Now, having taught public speaking and presentation skills for over 
a decade, I can say with confidence that the ability to harness your 
breath is one of the most important and least taught areas within public 
speaking. It’s critical when you’re speaking up in a meeting and it’s 
crucial when you’re giving a speech or presentation. It’s one of the key 
elements of executive presence.
This is not a new issue; Margaret Thatcher took voice lessons when 
she became Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and there is a 
“before and after” video where you can hear the difference. Some people 
thought she was consciously trying to speak with a lower voice (and 
there is some fascinating research suggesting that people with deeper 
voices have more success in business and politics). However, I hear a 
difference in Thatcher’s breathing which makes her voice richer, more 
resonant, and — as a result — lower.
When I showed that video to my class at the Harvard Kennedy School, 
students were split over which they preferred. Some preferred the 
former voice because it was soft and feminine, while others preferred 
the latter voice because, well, that’s how they wanted a prime minister 
to sound.
Regardless of your gender or voice, how do you harness the power of 
breathing in order to speak with confidence and power?
1. Start with the right posture. Stand with your feet shoulder-width 
apart, weight equally distributed, and raise your arms up over 
your head. Breathe in deeply. Now as you exhale, slowly lower 
your arms down to your sides and keep your ribcage where it is. 
Make sure your shoulders are back, not hunched up behind your 
ears. This is the best posture for speaking (and singing); you are 
standing tall, you are owning your full height, and you are resonating 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Breathing Is the Key to Persuasive Public Speaking
Copyright © 2015 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

confidence. Incidentally, this posture is similar to the power poses 
HBS professor Amy Cuddy talked about in her TED talk.
2. Breathe deeply. Put one hand on your belly button and one hand 
on your chest. Breathe in deeply, noticing which hand moves. I see 
a lot of people breathe while heaving their chest up and down, but I 
want you to keep your chest steady and think about breathing into 
your stomach as you take in breath. Then exhale slowly, like letting 
air out of a balloon. Having difficulty? Try “wall sits” – when you 
lean against a wall with your back flat against the wall and your legs 
slightly bent. This position helps you focus on your abdomen while 
breathing, instead of moving your chest. Disclaimer: if you feel light-
headed or dizzy, stop this exercise and breathe normally. It shouldn’t 
hurt — it should simply feel different.
3. Speak “on the breath.” Once you take in that full breath, you might 
not know what to do with it. Instead of holding it in, use that breath 
to support your words, letting it out steadily while you are speaking. 
I like to use a sushi analogy. Picture a piece of sashimi: a thin slice 
of fish over a bed of rice. Think of your voice as the fish, and your 
breath as the bed of rice. In order to support the voice, you need a 
constant, full breath of air through the entire sentence. What happens 
when the fish is longer than the rice? It flops over — and that’s exactly 
what our voice does when our breath trails off at the end of the 
sentence, creating vocal fry. So when you speak, practice exhaling 
slowly while speaking and letting your voice resonate with a full, 
supported sound. First, practice exhaling while slowly counting: “1…
2…3…4…5…” and then practice exhaling on the words, “Hello, my 
name is [your name]…”
4. Practice with a smart phone or a partner. It’s much easier for 
others to hear the change in your voice than it is for you to hear 
it yourself. When I teach corporate workshops, I ask participants 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Breathing Is the Key to Persuasive Public Speaking
Copyright © 2015 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

to find a partner and practice two different ways of speaking: first,
introduce themselves using their “normal” voice, and then take a 
few deep breaths and introduce themselves using the deep breathing 
method above. Participants don’t always hear the difference in 
themselves, but they often hear the difference in their partner, whose 
voice sounds richer, fuller, and more confident. You can do the same 
thing in your office with a colleague or record yourself on your smart 
phone. I’ve tried this technique in English, Mandarin Chinese, and 
other languages, and we can all hear the difference.
How often should you breathe? At the very least, at the end of 
every sentence! If you are prone to rushing through your speech or 
presentation, then practice breathing at every punctuation mark — it 
will force you to slow down.
How often should you breathe using this technique? You don’t need to 
use it all the time. Rather, practice this technique slowly, in the privacy 
of your home or office, until you can do it easily. After that, airplanes are 
a great place to practice breathing, followed by those endless meetings 
or conference calls. Practice a few deep breaths at a time, then relax and 
breathe normally. For 2 minutes a day in the morning, practice speaking 
the sentence “Hello my name is [your name]” while exhaling slowly. 
Over time, you can breathe quickly and discreetly between sentences, 
and it will also calm your nerves before stressful situations such as 
speeches or difficult conversations.
It’s not about trying to sound like someone else; it’s about giving your 
voice the richness and fullness it deserves every single time you speak 
in public, so that the power of your voice matches the power of your 
words. If you do that, people will listen.
This article was originally published online on June 30, 2015.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Breathing Is the Key to Persuasive Public Speaking
Copyright © 2015 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Allison Shapira teaches “The Arts of Communication” at the Harvard 
Kennedy School and is the Founder/CEO of Global Public Speaking, 
a training firm that helps emerging and established leaders to speak 
clearly, concisely, and confidently. She is the author of the new book, 
Speak with Impact: How to Command the Room and InfluenceInfluence Others 
(HarperCollins Leadership).
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Breathing Is the Key to Persuasive Public Speaking
Copyright © 2015 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
