Digital 
Article
Business Communication
Tips for Reading the 
Room Before a Meeting or 
Presentation
How to increase your social awareness. by Rebecca Knight
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Tips for Reading the 
Room Before a Meeting or 
Presentation
How to increase your social awareness. by Rebecca Knight
Published on HBR.org  /  May 10, 2018  /  Reprint H04B2V
beastfromeast/Getty Images
In every conversation at work, there’s the explicit discussion 
happening — the words being spoken out loud — and the tacit one. 
To be successful in most organizations, it’s important to understand 
the underlying conversations and reactions that people in the room are 
having. But if you aren’t picking up on those subtle cues, how can you 
learn to do so? What signals should you be looking for? And what can 
you do to influence the unspoken dynamics?
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Tips for Reading the Room Before a Meeting or Presentation
Copyright © 2018 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

What the Experts Say
“Knowing how to read between the lines is a critical workplace skill,” 
says Annie McKee, a senior fellow at the University of Pennsylvania, and 
the author of How to Be Happy at Work. “You need to understand other 
people — what they want, what they don’t want, their fears, hopes, 
dreams, and motivations,” she says. “This builds trust. And trust is 
fundamental to getting things done.” In addition, you must be aware 
of your effect on others, according to Karen Dillon, coauthor of How Will 
You Measure Your Life? “You need to be constantly assessing how other 
people are responding to you,” she says. “Some people find this easy and 
intuitive. For others, it’s a challenge.” The good news is that this skill 
can be learned. Here are some ways how.
Observe
The best way to read a room is to pay close attention to people — 
and not just what they’re saying. “If you’re relying [solely] on their 
words, you’re only getting half the picture,” McKee says. Upon entering 
a meeting, she recommends, do “a quick scan of the individuals,” noting 
“who’s next to whom, who’s smiling, who’s not, who’s standing, who’s 
sitting, and how much space is between people.” Next, try to pick up 
on “the almost invisible clues on how people are feeling” by looking 
carefully at “their facial expressions, posture, and body language.” Be 
on the lookout for “quick microexpressions” such as “fleeting smiles, 
raised eyebrows, or even tiny frowns.” Vigilant observation will give 
you the information you need to interpret group dynamics. Dillon 
recommends identifying role models to further improve your social 
awareness. “Think of people you admire who are great at reading the 
room,” she says. “Isolate the things they do and try to emulate those.”
Control how much you talk
You can’t observe if you’re spending most of your time talking. You need 
to listen, Dillon says. “Be conscious of how much you are saying.” 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Tips for Reading the Room Before a Meeting or Presentation
Copyright © 2018 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Whether you’re in a room with a large group of people, a small group, 
or you’re speaking with a colleague one-on-one, she advises taking 
frequent pauses “to really think about what the other person is saying” 
and watching out for the nonverbal cues. Don’t just wait for your turn 
to talk; there is “no shame” in silence. When the conversation is more 
intimate, Dillon says, you must strive to “make the other person feel 
heard.” Be present. Be engaged. Make eye contact. “Position yourself so 
that you’re not inviting others to butt into your conversation. Help the 
other people feel confident that you are all in the moment together.” 
After the other person says something, paraphrase what they said to 
indicate that you’re paying attention. Similarly, “if the other person 
doesn’t seem to be hearing what you’re saying, and you start to realize 
that you’re talking at them, you should ask a question,” she adds. 
Try open-ended questions such as “What do you think about…?” or, 
“What are the consequences of…?” or, “Have you experienced this?” The 
answers to these questions help you uncover what’s really going on.
Interpret your observations
Once you’ve “tuned into the emotions and energy in the room,” you 
can “try to make sense of what you think you know,” McKee says. 
She recommends “generating multiple hypotheses about what’s going 
on.” Consider the people in the group more broadly and reflect on the 
possible reasons for their individual and collective emotional states. 
“What’s happening in their lives? What’s going on in their jobs? What 
do you know about these people?” If you don’t know much, this can be 
tricky, but you can still come up with hypotheses for what’s motivating 
people. At the same time, you shouldn’t project your feelings onto the 
group. “Keep your emotions in check,” McKee says, adding that this is 
a feat that “takes tremendous skill and self-control.” If, say, the room 
is reverberating tension, don’t let yourself “be hijacked by negative 
energy, and don’t give in to your natural inclination to be frightened and 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Tips for Reading the Room Before a Meeting or Presentation
Copyright © 2018 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

angry.” Remember, too, that the emotions you perceive are not personal. 
“It probably doesn’t have anything to do with you.”
Check your hypotheses
When you’ve developed a few explanations for what’s going on in 
the room, check your understanding. You can do this by continuing 
to gather further information — though you should continue to be 
open to what you’re seeing and sensing so that you don’t fall prey 
to confirmationconfirmation bias. You can also ask people directly, in private, 
McKee says. When you’re in one-on-one conversations, you might say 
something like, “In the meeting I saw you furrow your brow when 
discussion turned to the xyz project — how do you feel about it?” 
Most likely, your colleagues will be pleased you noticed, she says. When 
you make note of people’s feelings and reactions, they “feel attended 
to.” Another tactic McKee suggests is talking with a trusted colleague, 
mentor, or coach. “Talk about what you’ve observed — not in a gossipy 
way, but as a learning opportunity,” she says. “You want someone else 
to check ideas with” so that you can say, “What do you think is going on 
with that colleague? Or that coalition?”
Put your perceptions into practice
If in the midst of a meeting or interaction, you notice that things are 
getting tense or heated, you can “take the opportunity to shift the 
emotional reality of the room,” McKee says. “Use humor,” she adds. “Or 
empathize with the group — make them feel okay.” She recommends 
determining who in the room has “the most social or hierarchical 
capital” and then focusing on getting that person on your side. “It could 
be a person who has the most seniority, or the person who others are 
sitting closest to. It could be the person who’s telling jokes and has 
the ability to lighten the mood.” Keep an eye out “for any positive 
signals” — the executive in the corner who’s smiling, for instance — and 
concentrate on those. Importantly, continue to pay attention to what’s 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Tips for Reading the Room Before a Meeting or Presentation
Copyright © 2018 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

not being said. “Most people are just waiting to talk,” she says. As a 
result, “we may catch most of the words, but we miss the music.”
Principles to Remember
Do:
• Consider the people in the room more broadly and reflect on the 
possible reasons for their individual and collective emotional states.
• Look for microexpressions such as fleeting smiles or raised eyebrows. 
These offer clues to group dynamics and individual emotions.
• Isolate the behaviors that your socially aware role model exhibits and 
try to emulate them.
Don’t:
• Be distracted. Maintain eye contact and be present and engaged in 
conversations with others.
• Make it all about you. Ask open-ended questions to help you uncover 
what’s really going on.
• Allow yourself to be hijacked by a room’s negative energy. Keep your 
emotions in check and do what you can to shift the emotional reality of 
the room.
Case Study #1: Pay attention to people’s body language and facial 
expressions
As the chief human resources officer at Prosek Partners, the global PR 
company, Karen Niovitch Davis has a good deal of experience reading 
rooms. “I’ve had a 20+ year career in HR,” she says. “A lot of what I do is 
about trying to really understand what people are saying when they are 
not actually saying it.”
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Tips for Reading the Room Before a Meeting or Presentation
Copyright © 2018 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Every week, she attends a management meeting at Prosek for senior 
vice presidents, managing directors, and partners. The company’s CEO 
leads the meeting, and Karen, because of her role, is often aware of 
what’s on the agenda.
“Since some of the things that we discuss are sensitive or controversial, I 
am often prepping for how my colleagues will react,” Karen says.
Recently, for instance, the CEO announced that the company would be 
expanding and that it had signed a lease for more space in the building. 
Certain employees and teams would be moving to another floor.
Karen paid close attention to her colleagues’ body language and facial 
expressions to gauge their reactions. She was prepared for a mixed bag. 
“I knew everyone in the room was thinking: What does this mean for 
me? What does this mean for my team? Are we all going to have to 
move?” she says. “That’s human nature.”
Many of her colleagues seemed “genuinely pleased” by the news, she 
recalls. “They were excited because the move means we are growing.”
Others, however, gave off a decidedly different vibe. Some people’s faces 
went blank; others visibly frowned. One — we’ll call her Jane — looked 
down and scribbled a note to a colleague sitting next to her.
Karen assumed that Jane wasn’t looking forward to the prospect of 
moving. She thought about what she already knew about Jane. “She 
does not like to change her routine,” Karen notes.
Shortly after the meeting ended, Karen approached Jane. She told her 
that it seemed that she was unhappy about the move. “I wanted to make 
sure she knew I noticed her,” Karen says.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Tips for Reading the Room Before a Meeting or Presentation
Copyright © 2018 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
6
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Jane appreciated that Karen noticed. “She said, ‘I don’t want to move 
because I like where my desk is now,’” Karen says. “She told me that she 
didn’t want to say anything in the meeting because she didn’t want to 
come off as not a team player.”
Karen listened attentively to Jane’s reasoning. She empathized with her 
and asked her open-ended questions about her concerns. She wanted to 
make sure Jane felt heard. “I told her that the office would be an exact 
replica of our current space and that the views would be better,” she 
says.
But Jane was not swayed by the argument. “I told her we would work 
something out so she would not have to move,” Karen says.
Case Study #2: Don’t assume you know how other people feel — ask 
them
Heather Anderson, an executive mentor at Vistage International, the 
San Diego–based advisory and executive coaching organization, says 
that she often speaks to her clients about the importance of social 
intelligence. “Emotions contain data,” she says. “I tell them that the 
emotional data they receive in their team meetings, their one-on-ones, 
and their client calls are just as important to their end game as anything 
else.”
She speaks from experience. Recently, Heather ran a meeting for one of 
her peer-to-peer coaching groups at Vistage. One of the agenda items 
was to provide feedback to one of the newer members — we’ll call her 
Susan. These meetings happen regularly; their purpose “is to challenge 
each other to be better leaders.”
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Tips for Reading the Room Before a Meeting or Presentation
Copyright © 2018 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
7
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

“People are candid in these meetings and it can feel harsh if you’re on 
the receiving end — particularly when it’s your first time,” Heather says. 
“It’s intimidating.”
Heather first scanned the room to gauge the temperature; it wasn’t 
particularly tense, but she could tell that Susan was nervous. Next, she 
listened carefully to what others said. The comments were “frank,” and 
it wasn’t particularly positive.
She paid close attention to Susan’s body language. “I could see the look 
of surprise and fear on Susan’s face,” she says. “She shrunk in her chair 
and her shoulders dropped.”
Heather empathized with Susan’s emotions and reflected on what was 
happening. “I thought she felt threatened,” Heather says. “I wondered, 
‘Should we soften our words?’”
To be sure, she asked Susan how she felt. “I said, ‘How are you feeling? 
What is it like to get this feedback?’”
Susan surprised her. “She said, ‘Wow. This is intense, but this is exactly 
what I signed up for.’”
Heather realized that she had projected some of her own feelings onto 
Susan. “I expected her to feel a certain way,” she says, “but you can’t 
assume you know.”
Later, Heather asked Susan how she planned to use the feedback she 
received during the meeting. “Susan was able to recite very specific
action items, and she talked enthusiastically about the things she 
wanted to do and changes she wanted to make,” Heather says.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Tips for Reading the Room Before a Meeting or Presentation
Copyright © 2018 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
8
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Heather plans to follow up with Susan in a few weeks.
This article was originally published online on May 10, 2018.
RK
Rebecca Knight is a journalist who writes about all things related to 
the changing nature of careers and the workplace. Her essays and 
reported stories have been featured in The Boston Globe, Business 
Insider, The New York Times, BBC, and The Christian Science 
Monitor. She was shortlisted as a Reuters Institute Fellow at Oxford 
University in 2023. Earlier in her career, she spent a decade as an 
editor and reporter at the Financial Times in New York, London, and 
Boston.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Tips for Reading the Room Before a Meeting or Presentation
Copyright © 2018 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
9
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
