Digital 
Article
Presentation Skills
Getting an Audience 
to Remember Your 
Presentation
Designing better presentations with cognitive science. by Art Markman
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Getting an Audience to 
Remember Your Presentation
Designing better presentations with cognitive science. by Art Markman
Published on HBR.org  /  September 21, 2015  /  Reprint H02D58
Lots of articles about giving good presentations focus on structure and 
style. Tips focus on the role of stories to get people interested in the 
material, the value of summaries at the end of talk, and the many facets 
of presentation performance – things like how you should stand and 
ways to use your hands and arms as you speak.
At the foundation of any presentation, though, is a fundamental 
goal that is often overlooked in helping speakers to design their 
presentation: that the presentation change the audience in some way.
To do this, you will almost always be trying to influence their memories, 
and so you need to be aware of how information gets into memory in 
order to create presentations that will have high impact.
In most talks, you are trying to affect the explicit memory of your 
audience. Explicit memory involves the aspects of your presentation 
that people can recall later (or perhaps at least recognize that you 
presented that information when they encounter it later).
Sometimes, you also want to encourage people to develop a skill. Skills 
are part of procedural memory. Procedural memory takes time and 
repetition to really learn. Think about the practice it takes to learn to 
touch type or to play a musical instrument or sport. If you want your 
audience to develop a new skill, then you should create exercises to help 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Getting an Audience to Remember Your Presentation
Copyright © 2015 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

your audience experience the kind of practice you want them to get. 
After that, though, you need to help your audience to develop a plan for 
when and where they will get enough practice to actually learn the skill.
More commonly, though, you aim to change the explicit memory of 
your audience.
This is the place where many presentations fall down. A general 
assumption behind most people’s talks is that if you find a compelling 
way to state a message and say it clearly, articulately, and confidently,
people will remember it.
In fact, decades of work on memory highlights three factors you can use 
to improve what people remember from your presentations.
1. Follow the right sequence. First, there is a broad serial position 
effect. The first thing presented in a sequence is best remembered. 
Information presented toward the end of a talk is also reasonably 
well remembered (though not as well as what you presented at the 
beginning). The middle of a talk is least well remembered. That means 
that you need to get the most important thing you want to tell people 
out right away.
One advantage of the often-used strategy, “tell people what you’re going 
to tell them, tell them, and tell them what you told them” is that 
you provide an overview of the key points of the presentation in the 
two positions in which the audience is most likely to remember them. 
Unfortunately, many speakers open their talk with an anecdote that is 
engaging, but only tangentially relevant to the topic of the presentation. 
The audience may easily recall this anecdote later, but it won’t help 
them to learn what they really needed to know.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Getting an Audience to Remember Your Presentation
Copyright © 2015 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

2. Draw connections. Connections among elements in memory matter. 
The things you pull out of memory are chunks of information. The 
analogy I use for this in my book Smart Thinking is a bowl of peanuts. 
If you take peanuts out one at a time, you get three peanuts when 
you reach into the bowl three times. But, if you pour caramel over the 
peanuts, then when you pull one out, you get a whole cluster. After 
you draw from the bowl three times, you may have gotten almost all 
of the peanuts out. Memory functions similarly. Making connections 
among the key points in your talk helps pour caramel over the peanuts 
in memory and increases the amount that people remember from what 
you present.
3. Make the audience work. It requires effort to get information into 
explicit memory. The more deeply that your audience thinks about the 
points you make, the more likely they are to remember what you told 
them later. Paradoxically, if your presentation is too polished, you may 
reduce the amount of work that your audience has to do to understand 
what you are telling them, which may inadvertently make the content 
of your talk less memorable. Think of this as the TED-talk paradox. My 
experience is that colleagues will remember that they saw a particular 
TED talk without remembering any of the content of that talk later, 
because the talks are so fluently delivered.
That does not mean that you want to give a confusing talk. But, it 
does mean that you need to provide opportunities for your audience 
to think for themselves. Perhaps you can let them vote on alternatives. 
Ask the audience questions and get them to make bets about what they 
think is right before giving them an answer. At the end of the talk, 
repeat the main points, but encourage the audience to summarize it for 
themselves. When people explain key points back to themselves, they 
learn much better than when they just hear it.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Getting an Audience to Remember Your Presentation
Copyright © 2015 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

By designing your presentations starting with the ways you want 
to affect your audience, you can do a better job of constructing an 
experience that maximizes your influence. Presentations are a fleeting
opportunity to literally get inside the heads of your audience. Don’t 
waste your time while you’re in there.
This article was originally published online on September 21, 2015.
Art Markman, PhD, is the Annabel Irion Worsham Centennial 
Professor of Psychology and Marketing at the University of Texas 
at Austin and founding director of the program in the Human 
Dimensions of Organizations. He has written over 150 scholarly 
papers on topics including reasoning, decision-making, and 
motivation. His most recent book is Bring Your Brain to Work: Using 
Cognitive Science to Get a Job, Do it Well, and Advance Your Career 
(HBR Press).
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Getting an Audience to Remember Your Presentation
Copyright © 2015 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
