Digital 
Article
Presentation Skills
To Make Your Pitches 
More Engaging, Appeal to 
Multiple Learning Styles
How successful pitches at Disney spoke to visual, auditory, and 
kinesthetic learners. by Duncan Wardle
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

To Make Your Pitches More 
Engaging, Appeal to Multiple 
Learning Styles
How successful pitches at Disney spoke to visual, auditory, and 
kinesthetic learners. by Duncan Wardle
Published on HBR.org  /  July 25, 2024  /  Reprint H08ART
John Lund/Getty Images
Imagine you’re in a meeting, pitching a killer idea you’ve been working 
on, but it’s like tossing a sparkler into a pool: it fizzles out; no fireworks.
The issue isn’t merely a matter of your idea, presentation style, or 
charisma. It often stems from a deeper problem of disengagement 
within the organization. In an age where only 33% of workers are 
engaged, how can you ensure your idea pitches land successfully?
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  To Make Your Pitches More Engaging, Appeal to Multiple Lear…
Copyright © 2024 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

To make your pitches more appealing, consider the three main types of 
learning styles: visual, auditory, and kinesthetic. No matter who you’re 
pitching an idea to, your audience will include a patchwork of learners. 
You might not know each person’s learning preference, so to resonate 
with as many team members as possible, you can develop and exhibit 
presentation skills that appeal to each learning style.
For example, I like to begin pitch meetings by drawing a picture of a 
birthday present and placing it on the wall. When people arrive, I’ll 
point to it and ask, “What’s this?” They’ll respond, “It’s a present.” I’ll 
agree and clarify that it’s also a reminder to remain mentally present 
at all times. Then, I’ll propose that everyone put away their devices 
to avoid distractions. It’s a gentle signaling approach that all learners 
understand because it includes an image (the drawing), a conversation 
(the question-answer element), and an action (silencing phones).
What else can you do to prepare an engaging pitch session that connects 
simultaneously with those who prefer to see, those who prefer to listen, 
and those who prefer to do? Even if you don’t know the learning styles 
of your audience members, you can apply the following strategies to 
appeal to a variety of learners.
1. For auditory learners: Harmonize your words with their 
imaginations.
In the late ‘80s, my colleague Joe Rohde pitched his idea for Disneyland 
Paris. He had a unique ability to convey what a Disney park would look 
like in France through his words. During his pitch, he brought us to 
the field where the park would be and described the soundscape of the 
park in vivid detail. He would say, “Imagine the cheerful piano melodies 
playing outside the Carnation Café by pianists dressed in red and white 
uniforms, or the distant laughter of families enjoying their day.”
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  To Make Your Pitches More Engaging, Appeal to Multiple Lear…
Copyright © 2024 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Even if you can’t immerse your audience in the literal landscape of 
your idea, you can similarly engage auditory learners by beginning 
your pitch with a compelling narrative that resonates with your idea. 
Research has found that listeners are more likely to remember a fact 
when it’s wrapped in a story. Plus, auditory learners are captivated by 
the rhythm and flow of words. Use varied tonalities, paces, and pauses 
to create a sonic experience that paints your concept in their minds.
Remember: The right word or set of words can change everything, 
including team members’ attitudes toward and receptiveness to ideas. 
How can you harness the magic of words in pitch meetings to better 
engage auditory learners? For starters, rephrase what you usually say. 
Simply switching from asking “What do you think?” to “Can you 
help me think about this differently?” invites expansive, open-minded 
responses to new concepts and ideas.
You could also incorporate relevant sounds or music that align with 
your pitch theme. A well-chosen soundbite can enhance emotional 
connection and reinforce memory retention for auditory learners. 
Brothers Richard and Robert Sherman had arguably the best use 
of sound in a pitch when they performed 13 songs, including 
“Supercalifragilisticexpialidocious” and “Let’s Go Fly a Kite,” in a 
meeting with Walt Disney and other executives in 1961. It wasn’t just 
a pitch; it was an experience, showcasing the joys of the world of a 
magical nanny. And it led Walt to write the screenplay for Mary Poppins 
— all because of those 13 unforgettable songs. Walt loved the songs so 
much that he invited Richard to his office every Friday afternoon to play 
his favorite — “Feed the Birds” — on the piano.
2. For visual learners: Paint a picture worth a thousand words.
Visual learners process information best when they can see it laid out 
in an appealing and organized manner, so integrate colorful charts, 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  To Make Your Pitches More Engaging, Appeal to Multiple Lear…
Copyright © 2024 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

graphs, and images that illustrate your points and ideas. You can also 
show a prototype, demo video, or animations in your presentation, or 
lay out your pitch as a visual journey akin to a storyboard. This helps 
visual learners follow your concept’s narrative path, ensuring they grasp 
the flow and key milestones.
Steve Jobs did this exceptionally well using visual aids during product 
launch presentations to enhance storytelling and audience engagement. 
His presentations were minimalistic yet powerful, focusing on high-
quality images and simple charts. Jobs’ approach has been widely 
studied and emulated by professionals across industries. His keynote 
addresses, such as the 2007 iPhone launch, are frequently cited as 
masterclasses in the power of visual storytelling.
You can also use visualization to great effect. After explaining the 
sounds of the proposed Disneyland Paris park, Joe asked us to close 
our eyes while he explained his ideas for the park, helping us visualize 
it ourselves. The way Joe used our imaginations to bring his idea to 
life reminded me of playing as a child — visualizing the rooms in my 
imaginary house or the city I was flying over in my airplane. Joe’s tactic 
made the park look and feel real, even though we were only standing in 
a field.
3. For kinesthetic learners: Let them touch the stars.
For the last part of his pitch, Joe physically walked us through the 
proposed Disneyland Paris site, using a string he laid out on the field
as a guide. As we moved through the space, Joe described the park’s 
layout: City Hall was on our left, and the Mickey Mouse ears shop was 
ahead to the right. This physical traversal of the park’s footprint allowed 
us to experience the scale and spatial dynamics of the layout, making 
the idea tangible and memorable.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  To Make Your Pitches More Engaging, Appeal to Multiple Lear…
Copyright © 2024 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Whenever possible, include a tangible element like Joe’s string that 
kinesthetic learners can interact with — be it a product prototype, 
interactive model, or even relevant materials or textures. This hands-on 
approach solidifies your concept in their reality.
Try creating an activity or simulation that kinesthetic learners can 
physically engage with, mirroring the experience your idea intends to 
deliver. This not only keeps their attention, but also makes the concept 
personally relatable.
For example, when Disney’s Hawaiian resort was experiencing low 
occupancy during the school year, my team was tasked with targeting 
a new audience: parents with toddlers who weren’t beholden to 
traditional school schedules. Two of my team members used a 
PowerPoint presentation to pitch their idea for appealing to this 
audience, which was to provide new products to vacationers, such as 
strollers, car seats, and baby bags. I couldn’t feel the vision, and I had 
older kids, so I passed on the idea.
They asked to come back and present the idea again. When I went 
into that second pitch meeting, there was no slide deck. In the room 
there were five car seats, strollers, and diaper bags, and hundreds of 
baby bottles, baby powder, and diapers. I approved the idea almost 
immediately because I could concretely visualize the idea they were 
trying to convey: that parents of toddlers would need to bring tons of 
baby items on vacation — unless we provided them.
. . .
Why settle for one-size-fits-all pitches when you can engage every 
learner in the room? By weaving visual, auditory, and kinesthetic 
elements into your presentations, you ensure that no idea falls flat, but 
rather, each one resonates deeply, sparking a vivid understanding and 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  To Make Your Pitches More Engaging, Appeal to Multiple Lear…
Copyright © 2024 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

memorable experience for team members. Let’s not just communicate 
ideas; let’s make them unforgettable by engaging every sense and 
learning style.
This article was originally published online on July 25, 2024.
DW
Duncan Wardle, formerly vice president of innovation and creativity 
at The Walt Disney Company, launched his creative consulting 
company iD8 & innov8 to help companies embed a culture 
of innovation and creativity across their entire organization. 
Duncan spent his 25-year career at Disney developing some of 
its most innovative ideas and strategies — ideas that would 
forever change the way the company expands its impact, trains 
its employees, and solves problems creatively. He has a new book 
releasing in December 2024 titled The Imagination Emporium, a tool 
kit that makes innovation accessible, creativity tangible, and the 
process fun.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  To Make Your Pitches More Engaging, Appeal to Multiple Lear…
Copyright © 2024 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
6
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
