Digital 
Article
Business Communication
How to Give a Stellar 
Presentation
Don’t let fear get in the way. by Rebecca Knight
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

How to Give a Stellar 
Presentation
Don’t let fear get in the way. by Rebecca Knight
Published on HBR.org  /  November 25, 2014  /  Reprint H01Q3Q
Speaking in front of a group — no matter how big or small — can be 
stressful. Preparation is key, of course, whether it’s your first or your 
hundredth time. From preparing your slides to wrapping up your talk, 
what should you do to give a presentation that people will remember?
What the Experts Say
Public speaking often tops the list of people’s fears. “When all eyes 
are on you, you feel exposed,” says Nick Morgan, the president and 
founder of Public Words and the author of Power Cues. “This classically 
leads to feelings of shame and embarrassment.” In other words: fear of 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Give a Stellar Presentation
Copyright © 2014 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

humiliation is at the root of our performance anxiety. Another problem 
“is that speakers often set a standard of perfection for themselves 
that they will never live up to,” Morgan says. “And then depending 
on how neurotic they are, they’ll spend the next few hours, weeks, or 
years thinking: ‘I should have said this,’ or ‘I should have done that.’” 
But presenters shouldn’t “fear a hostile environment” or second-guess 
themselves says Nancy Duarte, the CEO and principal of Duarte Design, 
and the author of the HBR Guide to Persuasive Presentations. “Most 
often the audience is rooting for you,” she explains. They “want to hear 
what you have to say” and they want you to be successful. Here are some 
tips that will help you deliver.
Understand your audience
As you begin to work on your presentation, think about your message 
and content from the listener’s point of view. “Research your audience,” 
says Morgan. “Understand their points of pain, what they’re interested 
in, their fears, needs, and wants.” Don’t think of your presentation as 
a chance to show off your expertise. “Instead, think about it as an 
opportunity to take your audience on a journey” in which you provide 
new perspectives and ideas, he says. Go in “with the mindset of a 
mentor,” adds Duarte. “Think about why your audience is coming to 
hear you speak. Ask yourself: what can I give them? What tool can I 
provide?”
Open with conviction
According to Morgan, the three classic mistakes speakers tend to make 
often happen in the first few minutes of a talk. The first mistake is 
introducing yourself — especially in a longwinded fashion. The second 
is telling the audience what you’re going to say — often in a form of a 
PowerPoint agenda slide. The third is what Morgan refers to as “throat 
clearing” — where you stand up and say things like: “Gee, it’s nice to 
be here. Wasn’t that a fun party last night? I see a lot of familiar faces 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Give a Stellar Presentation
Copyright © 2014 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

in the audience.” These things might make you feel more comfortable 
“but you’re just babbling at the audience,” Morgan says. And more 
importantly, you’re squandering the opening few minutes that are a 
key to engaging the audience. “Your goal is to immediately grab their 
attention and draw them in.”
Tell a story
A growing body of research points to the power of stories to change 
our attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors. Bear this in mind as you create 
your slides and talking points. “Stories wrap information in meaning 
and help your audience absorb your message in a memorable way,” 
says Duarte. First-person anecdotes about overcoming hardships or 
obstacles “build tension,” and give the audience something or someone 
to cheer for, she adds. The common alternative to stories — overloading 
your audience “with lists and slides of data and facts” — often results in 
glazed and distant looks, adds Morgan. “Stories will appeal to them on a 
deeper emotional level.”
Seek to inspire
Even when your talk is internal and your content is mundane — a 
presentation before your team about a product roadmap, say — your 
message shouldn’t be humdrum. “You could talk about the roadmap 
in chronological order and discuss the various deliverables, or you 
could remind your team of what could be and remind people how 
they are solving a problem bigger than themselves,” says Duarte. Your 
presentation should still focus on the topic or task at hand but by 
bringing in concepts like “meaning and purpose, you create a longing 
to get the job done” and do it well.
Think positively
Your physiological signs of stage fright — racing heart, clammy palms, 
and churning stomach — are “keenly felt by you, but are far less visible 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Give a Stellar Presentation
Copyright © 2014 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

to the eyes of the audience,” says Morgan. “You must remind yourself 
that you don’t look as bad as you feel.” And when your brain starts in 
on a feverish loop of negativity — I’m a fraud, This talk is going to go 
horribly — you need to counteract it. “Replace the negative thoughts 
with positive ones,” he says. “Tell yourself: ‘I’m going to be fine. I am 
passionate about this topic. I’ve given this talk plenty of times before.’” 
You might feel silly the first time you speak to yourself this way, but 
“positive self-talk really helps,” Morgan says.
Review and rehearse…
One of the best ways to get ready for an important speech is to practice 
it in front of a live audience. This needn’t be a professional coach: 
a friend or group of colleagues will suffice, says Morgan. After the 
rehearsal, “they can give you feedback on how you’re parsing your 
content and coach you on which sections of the presentation work best,” 
and which need improvement, says Duarte. For high-stakes talks, try 
to visit the venue where you’re presenting so you can get a feel for 
the stage and the environment. Duarte also suggests asking someone 
to film your rehearsal.  “Then go over the footage together to identify 
idiosyncrasies and improve your gestures and facial expressions.” The 
goal is to make sure “your body tells the story you want it to tell.”
…But not too much
Sometimes practicing too much can backfire. “Your audience will feel 
insulted if you haven’t prepared, but you can also over-prepare and end 
up coming across robotic and contrived,” warns Duarte. “Once you’ve 
practiced it enough and you feel good about the material, let go of the 
script and talk from the heart.”
Principles to Remember:
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Give a Stellar Presentation
Copyright © 2014 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Do
• Research your audience and keep listeners’ wants and needs in mind 
as you sharpen your content
• Practice your presentation in front of friends or colleagues and be 
open to their suggestions on how to improve
• Think positive thoughts by reminding yourself of your passion and 
interest in the topic
Don’t
• Babble, especially at the beginning. Open strong by grabbing your 
audience’s attention in the first few minutes
• Worry too much about appearing nervous; stage fright is natural and 
your audience will probably be forgiving
• Overburden your audience with facts and figures; tell stories and 
anecdotes that will appeal to your listeners on an emotional level
Case Study #1: Polish your story and then practice, practice, 
practice
In early 2013, Ted Karkus, the CEO of ProPhase Labs, the makers of 
Cold-EEZE lozenges, received a last-minute invitation to speak at a large 
investor conference that was only a week away. Ted would be part of a 
panel with executives from two other companies — both of which were 
about five times bigger than ProPhase.
“It was nerve-racking when I found that out, but then I realized: ‘I 
can talk passionately about this company because I believe in this 
company,’” he says. “But I also knew I needed to practice beforehand. 
I believe the degree of preparation is directly related to the quality of a 
presentation.”
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Give a Stellar Presentation
Copyright © 2014 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

While working on his talk he was guided by the principle “every slide 
should tell a story.” He did not want to overwhelm the audience with 
numbers. “We’re a public company — if people want numbers they can 
look on the internet. Instead, I wanted to talk about my goals and the 
history of Cold-EEZE.”
And he was confident that the story was compelling: When Ted took 
over the brand in 2009 after a long proxy battle, sales were spiraling 
downward. Not only did he have to cut a large percentage of his 
workforce, he also had to plead with retailers not to cut shelf space for 
his products. But after a “herculean turnaround effort” that included a 
new marketing strategy, new packaging, and an expanded product line, 
sales were growing rapidly.
Ted did not prepare for the speech alone. Around that same time, he 
was going to be in a TV commercial for Cold-EEZE, and he had hired an 
acting coach to help him. “I happened to bring my presentation to the 
rehearsal, and the coach spent a lot of time with me on it and taught me 
how to memorize my talk and still seem natural.”
About an hour before the speech, an investor asked Ted for a one-on-
one meeting. “It gave me a chance to go over the presentation,” he 
says. “It helped to say it out loud one last time before I went on stage. 
Afterward, I reminded myself that talking to this one person wasn’t 
much different from talking to 200.”
Ted’s talk was a big success. Before he left the podium, about a half-
dozen audience members approached him with ideas for the company.
Case Study #2: Find your theme and think about what will inspire 
your audience
In 2010, Michelle Reed — then chief marketing officer for a higher 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Give a Stellar Presentation
Copyright © 2014 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
6
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

education software company — was asked to give the keynote address to 
kickoff her firm’s weeklong customer event. About 8,000 people would 
be in the audience.
“I was terrified, frankly,” she says. “I wanted to do well and I wanted to 
make sure my message would resonate.”
The theme of the conference was: “Today’s priorities. Tomorrow’s 
possibilities.” Her aim was to get the audience thinking about how 
to improve students’ experiences using technology. “Higher education 
is about making a better life for yourself and for your family and 
ultimately making the world a better place,” says Michelle. “It was an 
aspirational, passionate message that I wanted to get across.”
As Michelle began to develop her content, she mined her life for 
examples. “I told a personal story of my experience registering for 
classes as a college student in the 1980s, which posed a stark contrast 
to what it was like for my kids in the mid-2000s,” she recalls. “When 
I registered for courses, I literally slept on the streets of Philadelphia, 
and when my number was called, I went into a room and ran around 
from table to table to try to find courses. My kids registered for courses 
online from the comfort of their dorm rooms…I wanted to demonstrate 
a strong understanding of how far we’ve come but I also wanted the 
audience to be thinking: ‘Wow. What’s next?’”
The talk was well received and the experience has made her more 
confident. Today Michelle is the CMO at SkillSurvey — which provides 
reference assessments to help employers make better hiring decisions—
and regularly has to give presentations to large groups. “I always try 
to focus on my audience members,” she says. “I think: How will they 
receive it? What do they care about? And what am I trying to compel 
them to do?”
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Give a Stellar Presentation
Copyright © 2014 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
7
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

This article was originally published online on November 25, 2014.
RK
Rebecca Knight is a journalist who writes about all things related to 
the changing nature of careers and the workplace. Her essays and 
reported stories have been featured in The Boston Globe, Business 
Insider, The New York Times, BBC, and The Christian Science 
Monitor. She was shortlisted as a Reuters Institute Fellow at Oxford 
University in 2023. Earlier in her career, she spent a decade as an 
editor and reporter at the Financial Times in New York, London, and 
Boston.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Give a Stellar Presentation
Copyright © 2014 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
8
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
