Digital 
Article
Presentation Skills
Stop Scripting Your 
Speeches
Anyone can read a script. Leaders champion their ideas. 
by Joel Schwartzberg
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Stop Scripting Your Speeches
Anyone can read a script. Leaders champion their ideas. 
by Joel Schwartzberg
Published on HBR.org  /  January 27, 2021  /  Reprint H064YM
Illustration by Jason Schneider
“Don’t worry,” a coaching client once told me shortly after I saw 
her rehearse her presentation. “I’ll have it completely written and 
memorized by next week!”
To my trained ears, she might as well have been saying, “Don’t worry, I’ll 
make my task pointlessly hard and ensure a distant connection with my 
audience!”
Like many people, she thought a “good speech” is something you write 
out word-for-word and read aloud — perhaps even memorize. Some 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Stop Scripting Your Speeches
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

learned this approach in school. Others inferred it from seeing stirring, 
perfect speeches from politicians, award recipients, and fictional
television characters.
If you have a team of speechwriters working for you, you should 
certainly have them work their magic and then take your position 
behind glassy teleprompters to serve it up. But that’s not the majority of 
us. Most of us give presentations more frequently in business meetings, 
online conferences, and a wide range of small- to mid-size internal 
and external events. In those typical settings, writing, reading, and 
certainly memorizing a word-for-word speech is actually one of the most 
destructive and counterproductive tactics you can take as a presenter.
Below are some of the biggest pitfalls of fully writing, reading, and 
memorizing speeches, as well as what you should be doing instead to 
accomplish what should be your main goal — engaging and inspiring 
your audience.
Writing Focuses on the Wrong Things
While a speaker’s primary goal is to engage and inspire, many 
communicators are inclined to write out their speeches because they 
mistakenly believe their goal is to be perceived as a fantastic speaker or 
writer. This mindset has nothing to do with getting your point across or 
doing your job, and sends you down a path of performance (“I want to 
impress you”), not presentation (“I want to convince you”).
In most cases, writing a full speech is also pointlessly time-consuming. 
For every important concept you raise, you’re crafting many extra lines 
to set up and contextualize those ideas. These words and transitions 
should come naturally and sound human, but when read word-for-
word, they can come across like the voice on a robocall — friendly but 
noticeably stilted and artificial.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Stop Scripting Your Speeches
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

A presentation audience doesn’t even have time to process — much less 
remember — specific words and phrases, so time spent conceiving and 
writing “the perfect words” is largely wasted on them, even if it brings 
comfort or pride to the speaker.
Finally, writing a full speech is a process that excludes the 
audience, whereas delivering a speech with limited notes involves and 
incorporates the audience into the experience. This concept is critical, 
because humans are more apt to give attention to speakers who seem 
to, or actually do, demonstrate a sincere interest in them. “The key to 
delivering a successful speech is showing your audience members that 
you care about them,” says Steve D. Cohen, an author and professor 
at Johns Hopkins Carey Business School. “If you maintain an audience-
centered approach, your listeners will reward you with appreciation.”
Imagine someone recommending a movie to you. Should that person 
look you in the eye and explain what makes the film compelling, or 
should they go home, write and edit a review, come back, and then read 
the finished review to you? Now imagine that person recommending not 
a movie, but a brilliant new marketing strategy, a breakthrough vaccine 
delivery system, or a campaign to save the earth. As an interested 
human being, you want to hear them make that case live and in their 
own spontaneously-generated words, not read something created apart 
from you and without you in mind.
Reading Builds a Barrier
Reading a speech word-for-word has its own unique disadvantages. It 
reduces the amount of eye contact you have with an audience, whether 
in an in-person meeting or on a Zoom call. Reading also diminishes 
your ability to speak with personal conviction because, when you read 
a speech aloud, your mind is not focused on enlightening or inspiring 
your audience; it’s focused on the task of reading hundreds of carefully 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Stop Scripting Your Speeches
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

chosen words in succession. It isn’t easy to read words and project 
fervency simultaneously, but when you remove the script, you restore 
the human connection between the speaker and their audience and 
enable more emotional transmissions.
In more than 15 years of watching and training speakers, I’ve rarely 
seen someone read a speech as compellingly as someone who presents 
a live point. Again, audiences typically zone out when a presenter 
is reading, because they feel cut out of the process of interpersonal 
communication.
Even the TED Commandments — a list of do’s and don’ts allegedly 
given to TED speakers — includes Commandment #9:
Thou shalt not read thy speech.
“Probably the worst of all public speaking sins is the temptation to 
disappear into your notes and read, as opposed to speak, to your 
audience. If they wanted to be read to, you could’ve just sent them an 
email with your speech content.”
Speaking spontaneously, with authentic conviction and awareness, 
signals that you have something to say — a point you feel so strongly 
about that you’re willing to express it personally and out loud. That 
sounds powerful, because it is.
Some people insist on writing full speeches to calm their public 
speaking anxiety. After all, how can you mess up when all you need 
to do is read 932 words in order, sprinkling in some emphasis and eye 
contact? But when you focus mostly on getting from the first word to the 
final 932nd, the whole point of public speaking is reduced to a robotic 
task.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Stop Scripting Your Speeches
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Sacrificing audience impact to preserve your comfort and security is not 
a sustainable approach. The best way to overcome public speaking fear 
is to embrace your purpose, not shrink from it.
Memorization Is Asking for Trouble
When you memorize something, you are still reading — now with the 
script in your head instead of in your hands — and the slightest memory 
failure can cause you to lose your place and throw you off. Even small 
memory lapses and bobbles may reveal to your audience you’re reciting 
from a script, which can injure your credibility, your authenticity, and 
their respect for you as an invited presenter.
Why risk forgetting something you memorized or bearing the 
engagement handicaps of writing and reading when there’s a much 
easier, quicker, and more effective way to prepare, practice, and 
present? For me, that better way consists of four basic steps:
1. Start with an Outline
Your grade school teachers were right: Every good communication 
starts with an outline — a roadmap that indicates the points you must 
hit on the way to your destination. The most effective outlines start with 
a proposition (I’m selling you an idea), followed by points that support 
that proposition (I’m showing you why the idea is beneficial to you).
The more you practice, the shorter that outline should become as you 
realize you require fewer and fewer reminders than you thought you 
needed.
2. Create Useful Notes
Eventually, your outline becomes so small and concise you can fit it 
on an index card. That’s your notes. Your notes are your cheat sheet, 
feeding you major points and essential details you might otherwise 
forget. I often tell my clients to construct their notes as they would a 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Stop Scripting Your Speeches
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

shopping list, complete with bullets, abbreviations, and no complete 
sentences.
On a shopping list you don’t write, “Buy three fresh avocados from aisle 
four in the produce section.” You write “3 avocados.”
In fact, your notes should be so personally coded for your personal use 
that they read as nonsensical to someone else.
The good thing about having notes versus a script is that, after looking 
up at your audience, you can look down and easily track where you are 
and what you need to say next. But if you lose your place between, say, 
words 439 and 440, it will take a conspicuous amount of time to recover.
3. Practice Effectively
You already know that practice is important, but it’s crucial 
to understand the difference between effective and ineffective
presentation practice. Ineffective practice is thinking about your speech 
and mumbling the words, which only helps you know your presentation 
better. Effective practice is having your mind and mouth work together 
to convey your speech aloud and in real time. This tactic comes closest 
to simulating what you’ll be doing when you deliver your speech for 
real.
You don’t need a person, a mirror, or a camera to practice effectively
— just you, your mind, and your mouth, practicing by physically 
presenting.
4. Trust Yourself More Than Your Script
You speak without scripts in your workplace all the time: in meetings, 
job interviews, performance reviews, conference calls, and more. If 
that’s true, then you spend a lot of time trusting yourself, your 
experience, and your credibility when you speak spontaneously. Use 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Stop Scripting Your Speeches
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
6
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

that understanding to confidently realize you never need a word-for-
word script to make compelling points.
When you know your points well, prepare good notes, and practice 
the right way, you’ll understand that conveying your ideas live and 
unscripted is easier, less scary, and more effective than you thought.
That leap of faith is also a leap of progress. Anyone can read a script. 
Leaders champion their ideas.
This article was originally published online on January 27, 2021.
JS
Joel Schwartzberg oversees executive communications for a major 
national nonprofit, is a professional presentation coach, and is the 
author of Get to the Point! Sharpen Your Message and Make Your 
Words Matter and The Language of Leadership: How to Engage and 
Inspire Your Team. You can find him on LinkedIn and X.
@TheJoelTruth
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Stop Scripting Your Speeches
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
7
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
