Digital 
Article
Analytics and Data 
Science
How to Give a Data-Heavy 
Presentation
Tell a clear story with your numbers. by Alexandra Samuel
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

How to Give a Data-Heavy 
Presentation
Tell a clear story with your numbers. by Alexandra Samuel
Published on HBR.org  /  October 16, 2015  /  Reprint H02FHD
Data storytelling has become a powerful part of the communications 
toolkit, allowing both journalists and marketers to communicate key 
messages by using data and data visualization to drive articles, blog 
posts, and reports. But the power of data storytelling isn’t limited to 
written communication: you can also use data to deliver presentations 
that are both more credible and more visually compelling.
Knowing how to develop and deliver a data-driven presentation is now 
a crucial skill for many professionals, since we often have to tell our 
colleagues a story about the success of a new initiative, the promise of 
a new business opportunity, or the imperative of a change in strategy 
— stories that are much more compelling when they’re backed by 
numbers.
In the past four years, data has become a bigger and bigger part of my 
own presentations, since I frequently speak about data-driven projects 
like the new rules for the collaborative economy, and what social media 
analytics can’t tell you about your customers. I’ve enjoyed the luxury 
of working closely with data analysts, infographic designers, and my 
own in-house speechwriter, which has helped me pick up some tricks on 
what it takes to create a successful data-driven presentation.
As with any communication, start by thinking about your audience. 
Who are you presenting to, and how much do they know about the 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Give a Data-Heavy Presentation
Copyright © 2015 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

topic? If you’re presenting data on three different sales strategies to 
the sales team that’s been testing those approaches, you can plunge 
right in and show them what worked. If you’re reporting on that same 
experiment to another part of the organization, you need to provide a lot 
of context before you drop the bar charts in their laps; otherwise what 
looks like a clear story to you may simply confuse them. A good rule of 
thumb is to look at the legend on your charts: if you can’t count on the 
audience knowing what each item in the legend actually refers to, you 
need to spend some time on setup before you get to the numbers.
It’s easy to let the data overtake your presentation, so be sure you know 
the overall story you’re trying to tell, and use charts sparingly to support 
your story. You’re not trying to subdue your enemy through the sheer 
volume of data you can bring to bear on your argument; you’re using 
data strategically, when it provides clear and concrete evidence for the 
story you’re telling. I’ve found that audiences get overwhelmed by back-
to-back data slides, so I try to intersperse charts with slides that convey 
my key point using images or a very few words of text. Show a photo of 
a shopping cart, and tell people that you now know which cash register 
displays are most likely to yield impulse purchases; then show the chart 
displaying the sales figures for different items. Follow that chart with an 
image or a few short bullets that emphasizes the actionable insights and 
implications of your data.
It’s rare that anyone will retain all the actual numbers in your 
presentation, so think about the words that capture the idea, insight, or 
conclusion you want them to hold onto. Instead of simply throwing up 
a bar chart that shows levels of employee engagement versus different
working arrangements, build to that key chart with a story about the 
impact of working arrangements on employee satisfaction — illustrated 
by actual human examples, if possible.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Give a Data-Heavy Presentation
Copyright © 2015 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

And if there is a single number that really captures your key point — 
like “employees who work from home 1 day per week are 30% happier 
than the rest of our workforce” — then make not just that chart, but 
that specific data point very prominent in your deck. Highlight it in the 
relevant chart, and consider giving that single data point its own slide or 
bullet in your conclusion.
As you present, remember that it takes people some time to digest a 
chart or data table. Take the time to spell out the story you see in 
the data so that it’s clear to someone who hasn’t been poring over 
that dataset for the past six weeks. A simple statement like “in every 
region except the Southwest, email outperforms phone calls as a way of 
generating leads; in the Northeast, 5% of emails get a response, versus 
only 3% of phone calls” will help people understand what they are 
looking at and how they’re supposed to read your chart. Speak slower 
than you usually do, and consider pausing for a moment mid-chart, to 
allow people the time to absorb the data; even if you prefer to wait until 
the end of your presentation for questions, ask if anyone needs you to 
clarify the chart.
While clarifying statements are helpful, that doesn’t mean you can 
neglect the visuals. If all you do is produce your charts with a 
tool like Infogr.am or Tableau — both of which will produce charts 
that look a heck of a lot better than what Excel spits out — you’ll 
immediately improve your data-driven presentations. You may still 
need to restructure or reformat your charts to make them work on 
screen, however. Even if you’ve used shading to differentiate between 
categories in a printed document, it will be easier for people to 
distinguish between on-screen categories if they’re shown in different,
contrasting colors.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Give a Data-Heavy Presentation
Copyright © 2015 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Make sure your legend and data labels are printed in a large, visible 
font; if you’ve used an infographic design tool like Infogr.am, which 
generates beautiful charts but doesn’t let you adjust font sizes, you’ll 
have to add your own, larger labels when you’re producing your final
deck. (My trick is to create those labels as individual text boxes in the 
color of my chart columns, so I can drop them on top of my columns and 
hide the original labels.)
If you don’t have the support of an infographic designer in creating your 
charts, get familiar with the very basic rules of good data visualization, 
like which types of charts to use for different purposes. And make 
sure that you don’t violate any data visualization principles when you 
squeeze your data onto a slide: if you simply can’t fit your entire chart 
onto a single slide in a way that is readable, it’s better to show highlights 
than to compromise the clarity of your data.  A column chart that shows 
eight categories of clustered columns is going to be very crowded — but 
don’t you dare turn it into a set of pie charts instead: if there’s value 
in comparing categories, you want to keep that as a bar chart where all 
the categories are aligned on a single base line. Perhaps you don’t really 
need to show all eight categories — just the five most important ones. Or 
maybe you will have to break your chart into two successive slides; if so, 
organize your categories so that the most closely related categories are 
kept together on each slide.
Lastly, there is a lot of value in leaving people with a physical (or virtual) 
copy of your charts, so that they can look at the numbers more closely 
after your presentation. Since data-driven decks and reports tend to get 
circulated, make sure that any charts you include can stand on their 
own, without you speaking to them: note the source of your data, make 
your legend clear, and annotate your charts with callouts that show 
people how to make sense of a specific data point (“7 in 10 customers 
chose the blue package”).
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Give a Data-Heavy Presentation
Copyright © 2015 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

If this is starting to sound daunting, don’t let a vision of the ideal data-
driven presentation report keep you from using data to present your 
work or ideas to colleagues or peers. With data storytelling, excessively 
high standards can keep us from seizing the opportunity to make a good 
story better by backing it up with quantitative evidence.
You don’t have to have the perfect dataset or the world’s most 
beautiful infographics to make data storytelling a valuable part of your 
communications toolbox. All you need is to break down the wall that 
keeps math in one part of your brain, and storytelling in another.
This article was originally published online on October 16, 2015.
Alexandra Samuel is a tech speaker and data journalist who 
creates data-driven reports and workshops for companies around 
the world. She is the co-author of Remote, Inc.: How to Thrive at 
Work…Wherever You Are (with Robert C. Pozen) and the author of 
HBR’s Work Smarter With Social Media. Follow her on LinkedIn.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Give a Data-Heavy Presentation
Copyright © 2015 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
