Digital Article / Business Communication
A Speech Is Not an Essay
Put the paper down. by John Coleman
Published on HBR.org  /  September 11, 2014  /  Reprint H00Z1G
Reading an essay to an audience can bore them to tears. I recently 
attended a conference where a brilliant man was speaking on a topic 
about which he was one of the world’s experts. Unfortunately, what 
he delivered was not a speech but an essay. This renowned academic 
had mastered the written form but mistakenly presumed that the same 
style could be used at a podium in the context of an hour-long public 
address. He treated the audience to exceptional content that was almost 
impossible to follow — monotone, flat, read from a script, and delivered 
from behind a tall podium.
He would have done well to heed the words of communication 
professor Bob Frank: “A speech is not an essay on its hind legs.” There is 
a huge difference between crafting a speech and writing an essay. And 
for those new to public speaking, the tendency to mimic the forms of 
writing we already know can be crippling.
Speeches require you to simplify. The average adult reads 300 words 
per minute, but people can only follow speech closely at around 150-160 
words per minute. Similarly, studies have shown auditory memory is 
typically inferior to visual memory, and while most of us can read 
for hours, our ability to focus on a speech is more constrained. It’s 
Copyright © 2014 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

important, then, to write brief and clear speeches. Ten minutes of 
speaking is only about 1,300 words (you can use this calculator), and 
while written texts — which can be reviewed, reread, and reexamined 
— can be subtle and nuanced, spoken word must be followed in the 
moment and must be appropriately short, sweet, and to the point.
As you focus on brevity and clarity in a speech, it’s also important to 
signpost and review. In a written essay, readers can revisit confusing 
passages or missed points. Once you lose someone in a speech, she may 
be lost for good. In your introduction, state your thesis and then lay 
out the structure of your speech ahead of time (e.g., “we’ll see this in 
three ways: x, y, and z”). Then, as you work through your speech, open 
each new point with a signpost to let your listeners know where you 
are with words such as, “to begin,” “secondly,” and “finally,” and close 
each point with a similar, review-oriented signpost (e.g., “so we see, the 
first element of success is x”). This lack of subtlety can be repetitive and 
inelegant in a written document, but it is essential to the spoken word.
Similarly, the subtleties of complex argumentation and statistical 
analysis can be compelling in an essay, but in a speech it’s important 
to drop the statistics and tell a story. Neuroscience has shown that 
the human brain was wired for narrative. And while I always appreciate 
arguments that are fact-based and grounded in sound logic, it’s easier 
for me to engage with a speaker when she keeps the statistics to a 
minimum and opts for longer and more vivid stories. Lead or end an 
argument with statistics. But never fall into reciting strings of numbers 
or citations. Your audience will better follow, remember, and internalize 
stories.
To bring these stories to life, remember that when delivering a speech 
you are your punctuation. When you’re speaking, your audience 
doesn’t have the benefit of visual signifiers of emphasis, change in pace, 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  A Speech Is Not an Essay
Copyright © 2014 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

or transition — commas, semicolons, dashes, and exclamation points. 
They can’t see question marks or paragraph breaks. Instead, your voice, 
your hand gestures, your pace, and even where and how you’re standing 
on stage give the speech texture and range. Vary your excitement, 
tone, and volume for emphasis. Use hand gestures consciously and 
in accordance with the points you’re trying to make. Walk between 
main points while delivering the speech — literally transitioning your 
physical position in the room to signify a new part of the argument.   
Standing motionless while speaking in a monotone voice doesn’t simply 
drain your audience’s energy, it deprives them of understanding — like 
writing a text in one run-on sentence with no punctuation or breaks. 
Resist the urge to read your speech directly from the page. Become the 
punctuation your audience craves.
Speeches and essays are of the same genus, but not the same species. 
Each necessitates its own craft and structure. If you’re a great writer, 
don’t assume it will translate immediately to the spoken word. A speech 
is not an essay on its hind legs, and great speech writers and public 
speakers adapt accordingly.
This article was originally published online on September 11, 2014.
JC
John Coleman is the author of the HBR Guide to Crafting Your 
Purpose (Harvard Business Review Press, 2022).
@johnwcoleman
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  A Speech Is Not an Essay
Copyright © 2014 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
