Digital
Article
Presentations
How to Nail a Hybrid
Presentation
by Sarah Gershman and Rae Ringel
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

How to Nail a Hybrid
Presentation
by Sarah Gershman and Rae Ringel
Published on HBR.org  /  May 05, 2021  /  Reprint H06C2R
Giada Canu/ Stocksy
We recently spoke to a CEO who was feeling anxious about public
speaking in the hybrid office. “When I give presentations now, it’s
simple. Everyone’s on Zoom,” he told us. “What happens when some
people go back while others still work from home?”
His anxiety makes sense. While Zoom presentations are far from ideal,
at least the audience is on an equal playing field. Literally, the boxes
on the screen are the exact same dimensions. Hybrid presentations, on
the other hand, run the risk of putting remote participants at a serious
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Nail a Hybrid Presentation
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

disadvantage. A major reason has to do with the energy created when
we are physically together — and the energy that is missing when we’re
not. We derive our shared energy in part from the nonverbal cues that
happen when we are together in the room. The knowing glances, the
facial expressions, the personal eye contact are all part of what makes
conversation flow more naturally. This is tangibly absent online, and
the lack of shared energy among remote participants can be enervating
(hence one of the factors of Zoom fatigue).
Corporate leaders looking to make hybrid presentations more inclusive,
energetic, and successful can look to the classroom for guidance. During
the early days of the pandemic and lockdowns, we worked with a
number of teachers and educators looking to improve their on-screen
speaking skills and presence. This academic year, as some kids returned
to school, we’ve seen some remarkable teachers master the challenge of
teaching effectively to hybrid classrooms.
We recently had the privilege of witnessing one of them in action. This
7th grade teacher from Bethesda was teaching poetry to a hybrid class.
We were immediately struck by his energy. His body was in constant
motion, and his eyes seamlessly moved from the screen back to the
faces in the room. He also encouraged the kids to move — asking for
raised hands or having the remote kids stand up to read. Even more
importantly, he assigned small working groups where remote and on-
screen kids worked together. Despite being hybrid, the class was one.
Below are seven strategies for presenters and meeting leaders to more
effectively engage everyone in their hybrid audience:
1. Focus on the positive.
Rather than focus on the liabilities of the hybrid meeting, focus on
the value each person can bring. Ask yourself how both the remote
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Nail a Hybrid Presentation
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

and in-person participants can benefit from hearing your presentation.
And how could the entire experience be enriched by having a hybrid
audience? A positive mindset will help you make each person essential
to the presentation. Moreover, that mindset is contagious. The presenter
sets the tone for the entire experience. If the presenter believes and
expresses excitement about the hybrid experience, this will positively
influence the experience of the audience.
2. Require cameras to be on.
In hybrid meetings, it is more important than ever that remote
participants turn their cameras on in order to show their full presence.
It is also critical that the presenter be able to engage visually with the
entire audience, not just with those in the room.
To level the playing field even further, consider asking in-person
participants to bring their laptops and turn their cameras on, keeping
themselves on mute when not talking. It can also be helpful to have a
screen in front of the room so that remote participants can be seen by
everyone.
3. Make direct eye contact.
Begin your presentation by first looking deliberately and directly at the
camera. This sends the whole group a message that the people on Zoom
are critical. Try to focus on the camera as if you were making contact
with one person. Then throughout the presentation, continue to switch
between looking at individuals in the room to returning your focus back
to the camera.
4. Move around to include everyone.
When your presentation begins, move towards the camera to help
remote participants feel connected to what is happening in the room.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Nail a Hybrid Presentation
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

As you continue speaking, move purposefully towards the people in the
room and then back again towards the camera. But be sure to keep the
camera frame in mind. You don’t want to venture too far out of the shot.
This back-and-forth movement communicates greater inclusivity and
makes participants both in and out of the room feel more connected to
each other.
Also consider spotlighting. If someone in the room is speaking, lift
the camera (laptop) and move it closer to the speaker (if they didn’t
bring their own). This reminds the people in the room that their remote
colleagues are part of the room.
5. Emotionally engage remote participants.
The hybrid model need not be a passive experience for those who are
dialing in. It is critical to help them feel heard and seen. Greet virtual
participants personally at the beginning of the session. And continue
to address and engage them throughout the presentation. This is easier
said than done. Presenters may have the best of intentions, but their
attention is naturally drawn towards people in the room. Designate
specific times in the presentation to speak directly to the remote
participants, and build into the content messages that are directed
specifically towards individuals dialing in.
6. Foster hybrid collaboration.
When dividing a larger presentation into smaller groups, the temptation
is to put the in-person and remote people in separate groups. This
reinforces the notion that the two are separate groups rather than one
group working together. Instead, try mixing it up. Have virtual and
in-person participants work together.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Nail a Hybrid Presentation
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

7. Keep it short.
Zoom has forced us to waste less time in presentations. When we get
back in the room, resist the temptation to speak for longer. Keep hybrid
presentations as brief and efficient as possible. Try to time the meeting
based on the energy levels of the remote participants. In the end,
everyone will appreciate this.
One of the potential advantages of hybrid presentations is that everyone
participates from their preferred location. The 7th grade teacher told us
that this has created greater equity in his classroom and that his class
has been enriched by each student learning from their place of peak
performance. This mindset is inspiring — both for his students and for
business leaders. As we move into this next era of hybrid presentations,
let’s follow his example and strive to create an inclusive and energizing
environment for each person in the audience.
Sarah Gershman is an executive speech coach and CEO of Green
Room Speakers. She is a professor at the McDonough School of
Business at Georgetown University, where she teaches public
speaking to leaders from around the globe.
Rae Ringel is the president of The Ringel Group, a leadership
development consultancy specializing in facilitation, coaching, and
training. She is a faculty member at the Georgetown University
Institute for Transformational Leadership and founder of
the Executive Certificate in Facilitation program.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Nail a Hybrid Presentation
Copyright © 2021 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
