Digital 
Article
Business Communication
To Give a Great 
Presentation, Distill Your 
Message to Just 15 Words
A TEDx producer on how to connect with your audience. 
by Tricia Brouk
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

To Give a Great Presentation, 
Distill Your Message to Just 
15 Words
A TEDx producer on how to connect with your audience. by Tricia Brouk
Published on HBR.org  /  November 07, 2018  /  Reprint H04N33
Caiaimage/Martin Barraud/Getty Images
Fearless public speaking is about more than combating nerves. It’s 
about knowing the technique, the art, and the business of public 
speaking.
In my two years working as a TEDx producer, and my 27 years working 
in film, television, theater, and events production, I have worked 
with hundreds of speakers, and with actors including Kate Winslet, 
Christopher Walken, Susan Sarandon, and the late James Gandolfini.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  To Give a Great Presentation, Distill Your Message to Just 15 W…
Copyright © 2018 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

All of the speakers and actors I’ve worked with rely on technique when 
they walk on to a stage or a set. They don’t simply hope they will connect 
with the scene or with their scene partner. The same applies to anyone 
who’s public speaking. While you may not deliver a captivating talk 
every time, you can learn to apply technique, and in turn, become a 
fearless speaker every time. But your nerves are not the only thing you 
have to master. You must also:
Know how to pitch. When you understand and master the pitch, you’ll 
get onto more stages, which in turn will give you the confidence to 
become fearless each time you pitch. Start with the idea and why you 
are the right person to take the stage and deliver this big idea. While 
it must be a big idea, you need to be able to communicate it in 15 
words or less. Organizers are busy, and they don’t have time to read 
through lengthy pitches. Share what the audience will take away, as 
well as the global impact of the talk. Don’t save the most important 
part of your pitch for the end; people may stop reading before they ever 
get to it, landing you in the “no” pile. And don’t try to sell your book 
or business in a pitch for a speaking gig. If you want to sell from the 
stage, that conversation happens after you book the gig. Seventy-five
percent of the potential speakers who apply to my events, including 
TEDxLincolnSquare, The Speaker Salon, and currently Speakers Who 
Dare, end up pitching their business. That’s a lot of people who do not 
understand the art of a pitch, and who subsequently end up in the no 
pile.
Know your audience. When you do research on your audience ahead 
of time, it gives you the opportunity to craft your talk with the language 
that your audience speaks. For example, if you’re speaking on a panel, 
you can speak more intimately to the audience. If you’re at an event 
that’s more high energy, your language can reflect that — you can 
entertain the audience a bit more. If you’re at a conference that’s for 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  To Give a Great Presentation, Distill Your Message to Just 15 W…
Copyright © 2018 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

professionals, you can speak in more technical terms. Speaking the 
same language as the audience increases the odds that they will hear 
you, understand you, and be inspired by you. You’re more likely to 
connect with them emotionally. If you’re walking into a speaking gig 
without knowing your audience, you’re bound to fall flat and end up 
looking at the tops of their heads as they check their cell phones. You 
have to know who you’re talking to.
Know your objective. In order to have an authentic scene, actors 
have to know what they want from their scene partner, and want to 
be believable when they are going about getting it. It’s the same for 
public speaking. It’s about being authentic. Even though the audience is 
probably not going to audibly respond to you when you’re speaking on a 
stage, you are in a scene with them, and when you have a clear objective 
in terms of what you want, and how to get it, you will be more believable 
and captivating from the stage, therefore building your confidence as 
a speaker. Think about the objective you have going into your speech. 
Maybe your goal is to get the audience to donate to a worthy cause, or 
spread the word about your ideas. If you want your audience to accept 
your ideas, or change their opinion about something, how are you going 
to get them to do it? You can inspire, motivate, or even scare them into 
changing their minds. But you can’t do any of those things until you 
know what you want the ultimate outcome to be.
Know the difference between a good talk and a bad talk. A good talk 
has content that is fresh and well-edited, with a clear arc that takes us 
on a journey. A good talk is one that is so well rehearsed that you are 
able to let go of the script and freely share the content in the moment. 
A good talk is one where your audience wants to adopt your idea at the 
end of the talk. A bad talk, on the other hand, is one that meanders, does 
not have a clear through-line, ends more than once, and is apologetic. 
A bad talk is so well rehearsed that you sound robotic and scripted, 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  To Give a Great Presentation, Distill Your Message to Just 15 W…
Copyright © 2018 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

or so unrehearsed that you stumble too often and lose your audience’s 
attention.
Know yourself. Public speaking is hard work. It’s time-consuming, 
and it’s emotionally and physically draining — especially if you are 
an introvert. But introverts can become engaging public speakers by 
flexing the muscle of being in public. Practice by going to events and 
coming out of the corner. If you have a speaking engagement, take extra 
time that day to sit quietly, meditate, and refuel. If you are an extrovert, 
be sure to save your voice before you take the stage — you can always 
socialize after your talk.
Fearless speaking is the sum of many parts; it’s not just about wrangling 
the butterflies in your stomach. When you approach public speaking as 
the sharing of ideas as well as a business, understanding what makes 
this a successful exchange, your confidence will improve in direct 
proportion to the number of times you nail it, on and off the stage.
This article was originally published online on November 07, 2018.
TB
Tricia Brouk is an award-winning director, writer, and TEDx 
producer, and Executive Producer of Speakers Who Dare. She 
has directed speakers on to 11 TEDx stages, and countless other 
mainstages. Her production company, The Big Talk, produces 
documentary films about people making a difference in the world.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  To Give a Great Presentation, Distill Your Message to Just 15 W…
Copyright © 2018 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
