The Value of a Good Visual:
Immediacy
by Bill Franks
March 21, 2013
Our brains are meant to see in pictures. Grids and columns of
data, while ubiquitous, make it very difficult to see trends or
patterns. Additionally, a lot of the new data sources available
today, such as genetic data or social network data, don’t lend
themselves to traditional spreadsheets and graphs. These data
types require a different way of displaying them to allow us to see
the underlying patterns and stories in the data.
I’d like to walk you through an exercise to illustrate how effective
visualizations allow you to immediately comprehend a complex
set of relationships. Consider a standard map, such as the map of
the United States below. If I show you the map and ask you to
describe how a few states are related to one another, you can
immediately visualize and verbalize an answer. New York is up
and to the right of Virginia while Texas is down and to the left.
There are several states in between the two and Texas borders
fewer states than Virginia does. Simple, right?
2/12/25, 11:41 PM
The Value of a Good Visual: Immediacy
https://hbr.org/2013/03/the-value-of-a-good-visual-imm
1/5

Next, I take away the map and give you a set of data that gives
relative location, size, spatial border details, and other
information about the states. Could you describe the same
relationships in just a few seconds based on the data alone? I’ll bet
you’d throw your hands up in the air — just like me. I have never
been able to find a remotely reasonable way to explain the
information immediately visible to me in a map without making
use of a map.
You might not immediately grasp the importance of the above
example because it seems self-evident that maps are important.
I’d like to suggest to you that the reason for that is that you are
2/12/25, 11:41 PM
The Value of a Good Visual: Immediacy
https://hbr.org/2013/03/the-value-of-a-good-visual-imm
2/5

aware that maps exist in the first place. Had you never seen a
map, you’d be struggling to explain the information that a map
conveys in some other way.
This is the key to the value proposition of data visualization. It
could be that you are struggling to convey information without
being aware that there is a visual that can have the same type of
impact as a map. Or there may be connections among all that data
that you’d never make without a visualization. Until you see the
visual for the first time, however, you won’t appreciate the value it
offers. Take a look at the social network graph below: it shows is
that there are several distinct groups of people who interact a lot
among their own group and they don’t really interact outside of
their group. However, there is a single person who has contact
with each group and connects them. That person would be the
critical one to reach if you want to influence those groups easily.
See how easy it is to understand the connections between people
and groups?
As the map example illustrates, data visualizations can make it
easy to rapidly understand relationships, patterns, and stories
that are contained within a complex data set. This is the reason
they are so powerful. There is a reason for the saying “a picture is
worth 1000 words.” It also holds for data points.
2/12/25, 11:41 PM
The Value of a Good Visual: Immediacy
https://hbr.org/2013/03/the-value-of-a-good-visual-imm
3/5

One of the best features of modern visualization tools is that they
permit interactivity with the underlying data. In other words, a
visual isn’t static. You can click on various parts of a visual to drill
into different views of your data on the fly. While many business
intelligence tools have enabled drill down reports for years, they
typically contain only common visuals and also typically
constrain users to predetermined paths. Visualization tools today
don’t apply many limits on what users can do, which opens up a
lot more options for analyzing data.
A few years ago, we put a popular visualization tool on my team’s
laptops. It was a huge hit. Over time, several members of my team
stopped using traditional spreadsheet and presentation tools
altogether in favor of the visualization tool. Even if all they need
to show a client are some fairly standard bar and pie charts, the
interactivity of the tool is a huge plus. When the chart is up on the
screen and a client asks a question that requires a different view
of the data, it is easy to drill into that view on the fly. No more
sending an email later in the day with another chart. The data in
the charts can also be automatically updated with the latest data.
That adds a lot of value on top of the visualizations themselves.
Don’t underestimate how much an appropriate visual can help
you get your point across. You have to see the power of high-
impact visualizations in order to fully grasp what is possible. The
good news is that modern visualization tools can help users at any
skill level do a better job of analyzing, comprehending, and
presenting information. Give it a shot.
Visualizing Data
An HBR Insight Center
Your Business Needs Insight, Not Just Pretty Pictures
It’s Time to Retire “Crap Circles”
The Power of Visualization’s “Aha!” Moments
We’ve Reached Peak Infographic, and We’re No Smarter for It
2/12/25, 11:41 PM
The Value of a Good Visual: Immediacy
https://hbr.org/2013/03/the-value-of-a-good-visual-imm
4/5

Bill Franks is Chief Analytics Officer at Teradata and a
faculty member at the International Institute For Analytics.
He is also author of Taming The Big Data Tidal Wave and
The Analytics Revolution.    
BF
2/12/25, 11:41 PM
The Value of a Good Visual: Immediacy
https://hbr.org/2013/03/the-value-of-a-good-visual-imm
5/5
