Digital Article / Presentation Skills
Presenting to Management? Be 
Prepared for the Tough Questions.
Take your time, and make every word count. by Sabina Nawaz
Published on HBR.org  /  April 3, 2020  /  Reprint H05H7W
kristianbell/Getty Images
I don’t understand. How can your numbers be so off?
What would you do if faced with a question like this from upper 
management at a review meeting? If you’re like most of the executives I 
coach, you’re likely to be coated with an unattractive layer of sweat and 
dealing with a dry throat and a desiccated brain, leave you staring back 
blankly without any signs of intelligent life behind your eyes. You might 
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

think, “This is it. They’re finally going to say I’m no good. My career is 
over!”
We’ve often spent hours rehearsing before presenting to upper 
management, only to freeze when confronted with a tough question 
from our bosses. All our preparation and carefully curated slides go 
unacknowledged. It’s our botched responses in the moment that stick.
If you’re presenting to an executive audience, you clearly have 
credibility, expertise, and a successful track record. You know how to 
tackle live questions because you can fall back on your knowledge and 
experience. But how do you field the tough questions from management 
— the ones you don’t have an answer to?
Here are four ways to handle what you don’t know:
Take your time
Don’t be too quick to respond after an executive grills you. Be sure you 
understand the question. Pause to consider your first words. If they’re 
strong, you and your questioners will both feel more confident as you 
continue. There’s a range of ways to buy time, from taking a sip of water, 
to paraphrasing the question, to holding silence. Executives feel heard 
when you take time to be thoughtful. You can say, “Am I understanding 
you correctly — you want to know more about the target setting process 
that has gotten us to this point?” Or give them a choice, “What would 
be most helpful to you right now? Understanding the target setting 
process or exploring what we can do to make up our numbers?” The next 
time you’re in a meeting, notice how the people who appear the most 
confident treat time. They discuss items with efficiency and impact 
without appearing rushed.
Pausing before you speak will also allow for better verbal “posture.” You 
may be aware of some of your verbal tics and be pretty good at curbing 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Presenting to Management? Be Prepared for the Tough Questi…
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

them most of the time. However, under stress, “um,” “er,” “you know” 
and other crutch words tend to creep out from your carefully groomed 
mannerisms and unconsciously proliferate. Take a deep breath (or that 
sip of water) and remain silent until you can start with a real word 
instead of filler. Picture your phrases ending in commas and periods, 
and accentuate the punctuation by breathing instead of defaulting to 
your favorite filler word. Avoiding tentative words transmits greater 
confidence in your abilities, and pauses offer the bonus of additional 
time to think.
Have an abundance mindset
If you’re like most people, being questioned when you don’t know 
the answers likely makes you think that your bosses find you inept, 
incapable of doing your job, or that you’re about to be publicly 
humiliated or fired. These common thinking traps stem from anxiety, 
and we trip into them when under pressure. They erupt from a fear of 
scarcity; our end result is not enough or, worse, we are not enough. Flip 
to an abundance mindset instead. Construct sentences to tell yourself 
the opposite of the fear-based ones flooding your mind. Remind 
yourself, “There’s no one who knows more than me about process X.” 
Add additional sentences of plenitude rather than scraping the bottom 
of the performance barrel. For example, “My senior vice president really 
wants this project to do better than any other because no one has ever 
done this before.” Or, “My general manager wants me to succeed and is 
asking the tough questions now, so I shine when presenting to our CEO.” 
An abundance mindset can calm you to maintain analytical thinking 
and presence of mind.
Provide the bottom line first
Unlike a murder mystery, start with the end when you’re ready to 
respond. Your management likely wants to know the current status, 
not all the steps you took to arrive at it. Provide the bottom line and 
only provide more details if asked. Try, “I don’t have all the data to 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Presenting to Management? Be Prepared for the Tough Questi…
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

answer your question and will get back to you by X time/date.” Or, “We 
are at risk of underachieving our target. The variance is higher than 
we feared. We’re working on the exact number.” Or show that you’re 
already on to next steps: “We’re taking this very seriously and have 
already started examining our process and communications to ensure 
we’re in better shape before next quarter. We will come back to you 
with recommendations. In the meantime, our immediate focus is first
on finding ways to address the shortfall.”
Adhere to a word diet
In charged meetings, be up front but say less. If you tend to ramble 
when anxious, discipline yourself to stick to three to five sentences 
— and I don’t mean 30 sentences that are linked with liberal use of 
conjunctions to disguise them as three. Here’s an example, “I share 
your concern. We’re taking this seriously. Early indications are that the 
situation might be redeemable with some creative brainstorming. We’ll 
have more data by 7 am tomorrow.” Budgeting your words forces you 
to be clear and direct, respects your audience’s time, keeps you out of 
the weeds or unexplored territory, and deters micromanagement. Say 
enough to show you get it, share what you know with your questioners, 
and specify when you’ll provide additional information.
No matter your level of smarts and preparation, it’s unlikely you’ll 
escape executive presentations without a few stumping questions. 
These steps can help you react calmly and professionally in the 
moment. While you can’t anticipate exactly what you won’t know 
during a meeting, you will know what to do when you confront it.
This article was originally published online on April 3, 2020.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Presenting to Management? Be Prepared for the Tough Questi…
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Sabina Nawaz is a global CEO coach, leadership keynote speaker, and 
writer working in over 26 countries. She advises C-level executives 
in Fortune 500 corporations, government agencies, non-profits,
and academic organizations. Sabina has spoken at hundreds of 
seminars, events, and conferences including TEDx and has written 
for FastCompany.com, Inc.com, and Forbes.com, in addition to 
HBR.org. She is the author of You’re the Boss: Become the Manager 
You Want to Be (and Others Need). Follow her on Twitter.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Presenting to Management? Be Prepared for the Tough Questi…
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
