Digital Article / Business Communication
Don’t Just Memorize Your Next 
Presentation — Know It Cold
Learn it upside-down and backwards. by Sabina Nawaz
Published on HBR.org  /  February 7, 2020  /  Reprint H05E6H
THEPALMER/Getty Images
The three judges beamed at me. Buoyed by their support, I anticipated 
winning this college elocution competition. I nailed the first verse of 
my chosen poem, but might as well have been under general anesthesia 
when trying to remember a single word of the second verse. Now the 
judges’ encouraging smiles only roiled my rising panic. Finally, the 
timer buzzed, ending my turn on stage and initiating a two-decade fear 
of memorization.
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

In my early work life, whenever I spoke, a part of my brain was on 
anxious alert lest I forget something. It was hard to concentrate or 
interact with the audience. Over the years I honed the art of speaking 
on the flyfly. Whether it was the dreaded table topics at Toastmasters’ 
meetings or tough questions from my CEO, it became hard to stump me. 
I started to rely on impromptu speaking skills for larger presentations.
Until a meeting in Paris. I’d decided to mostly wing it through my 
segment because I felt being in the moment was better than being 
over prepared and freezing if I forgot my point. Instead, the audience’s 
probing questions flummoxed me. Unable to reference research on the 
fly or otherwise respond knowledgeably, my content fell far short of 
expectations.
The elocution competition and the meeting in Paris were very different,
but there was a commonality: my preparation when speaking to an 
audience. I’d memorized the poem but hadn’t rehearsed it repeatedly 
enough; under performance stress I faltered. In Paris, I relied on my 
well-developed impromptu speaking muscle but couldn’t deliver on the 
details. I’ve harnessed lessons from both these failures in my current 
career where I’ve delivered a TEDx talk and speak publicly — almost 
once a week — at keynotes and leadership workshops, and I also coach 
others on how to present. Based on my experience, I’ve found one 
approach to public speaking works best: knowing your “script” cold.
Knowing a script or presentation cold means taking the time to craft 
the words and sequence of what you plan to say, and then rehearsing 
them over and over until you could recite them backwards if asked. It’s 
memorization on steroids, but modified according to your needs and 
speaking venue — whether you require mastery of key bullet points 
to land with your audience or need to learn a speech word for word 
until it’s as familiar as your own name. You think about what would 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Don’t Just Memorize Your Next Presentation — Know It Cold
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

be most effective for your audience and plan not just the words but 
the actions and transitions between points, so it becomes one fluid
motion for you, all the while allowing time for adjusting or improvising 
during the speech itself. “Knowing it cold” is a pressure valve; you’re less 
nervous, which helps reduce the stimulation of your sweat glands and 
commensurately boosts your confidence.
Learning your script cold allows you to move from one point to the next 
without thinking about it. When you’re not worrying about what comes 
next, you’re able to be fully present with your audience and adjust to 
their reactions. I’ll pause if people laugh so they can enjoy the moment, 
or  alter the volume or pitch of my voice if I sense the audience losing 
interest. Many people worry they’ll appear scripted and stilted if they 
over prepare, but this is only true if you know your material well but not 
well enough. Knowing it exceptionally well paradoxically frees you to be 
more natural and responsive in the moment. I often become emotional 
in my keynotes, but it’s at a different part of the speech each time 
depending on my interpretation that day and what I sense from the 
audience.
Here are five techniques that facilitate script preparation and mastery:
Decide how you will craft your script.
Your content might consist of key talking points like productivity expert 
Tim Ferris’s EPE (example, point, example) technique. Or you can 
write down every detail of your script including pauses, like Winston 
Churchill. The method you choose will depend on your style of speaking 
and what is suitable for the event. For instance, for an interactive 
leadership class, I’ll master about a dozen points to make during the 
session to ensure the key concepts resonate. For a more structured 
workshop, I’ll remember my key points in sequence, so they follow 
a roadmap. For major keynotes, although I may not memorize every 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Don’t Just Memorize Your Next Presentation — Know It Cold
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

single word exactly, I prefer to write out the full speech and exhaustively 
rehearse it.
Create natural sections.
Regardless of length, break your talk into sections. For a 30-minute 
speech, think of segments that are two to three paragraphs long. Even 
when I write my full speech, I create a segment list: a bulleted outline 
of each section. Then, tackle each section individually. If I’ve chosen to 
memorize a script, I tend to master the sections in order, but learn them 
in a way that makes sense to you. Then I rehearse the shifts between 
sections. Transitions can be especially tricky, so note any troublesome 
segues and practice them repeatedly before proceeding.
Learn your script over time.
No matter how sparse (bulleted list) or dense (written script) your 
material, don’t underestimate the amount of time it takes to really 
absorb it. The biggest mistake you can make is reserving only the 
day before to prepare. For a big talk, your script should be solidified
at least four to six weeks prior. Spend time daily memorizing part of 
your speech. To save time, read or listen to a portion of your script 
right before bedtime, or multi-task as you brush your teeth. Record 
your speech and listen to it (safely) whenever you’re driving, exercising, 
or running errands. I logged 200 hours learning my TEDx script; the 
majority of those were spent in the car. Then, when I could focus on 
memorization, the process would go much faster.
Don’t only rehearse from start to finish.
Most people start at the beginning each time they practice, resulting 
in an unevenly memorized script; the introduction is solid, but the 
conclusion is shaky. Instead of learning your script in sequence, start 
at a random section and complete from there. Then stitch it together. 
Keep in mind that movement helps commit more words to memory. If 
you’re going to deliver your talk standing up, don’t sit down to rehearse 
or memorize. I will often mark out a mini stage and walk across it as I 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Don’t Just Memorize Your Next Presentation — Know It Cold
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

would during the actual speech. Associating a section of the speech with 
a place on stage is a memory aide. It may be useful, too, to practice 
your speech in the exact outfit you’ll present in, including shoes. 
Constantly fussing with an awkward piece of clothing mid-speech can 
be distracting both to you and your audience.
Have a plan for forgetfulness.
Instead of trying to wing it in the moment, strategize how to handle a 
memory lapse as part of your preparation. Craft two or three phrases 
you can use. Knowing that I have these go-to phrases makes me less 
nervous about forgetting. Examples: “Let me refer to my notes” or “I’m 
struggling to remember my next point. Let me take a moment and step 
back.” Or, simply plan to take a sip of water. Your audience will be 
supportive and grateful for your transparency, and the lapse will be 
less awkward for everyone when you don’t panic and pretend nothing’s 
wrong.
Mastery of your script comes in many forms ranging from being 
so clear on your crucial points that no tricky question from the 
audience will erase them from your mind, to knowing a keynote script 
verbatim. When you know your script cold, you not only are able to 
deliver what you want, you serve your audience by providing them 
the best of what you have curated and planned. Whether speaking 
at a conference, setting direction for your team, or persuading upper 
management to greenlight an idea, for an important presentation, know 
your information cold so you can master the moment.
This article was originally published online on February 7, 2020.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Don’t Just Memorize Your Next Presentation — Know It Cold
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Sabina Nawaz is a global CEO coach, leadership keynote speaker, and 
writer working in over 26 countries. She advises C-level executives 
in Fortune 500 corporations, government agencies, non-profits,
and academic organizations. Sabina has spoken at hundreds of 
seminars, events, and conferences including TEDx and has written 
for FastCompany.com, Inc.com, and Forbes.com, in addition to 
HBR.org. She is the author of You’re the Boss: Become the Manager 
You Want to Be (and Others Need). Follow her on Twitter.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Don’t Just Memorize Your Next Presentation — Know It Cold
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
6
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
