Digital 
Article
Business Communication
The Presentation Mistake 
You Don’t Know You’re 
Making
When salespeople, marketers, and job interviewers add on extras, they 
undercut their pitch. by Heidi Grant
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

The Presentation Mistake 
You Don’t Know You’re 
Making
When salespeople, marketers, and job interviewers add on extras, they 
undercut their pitch. by Heidi Grant
Published on HBR.org  /  October 23, 2012  /  Reprint H009LA
During an interview, your potential new boss asks you to briefly
describe your qualifications. At this moment, you have a single 
objective: be impressive. So you begin to rattle off your list of 
accomplishments: your degrees from Harvard and Yale, your prestigious 
internships, your intimate knowledge of essential software and 
statistical analysis. “Oh,” you add. “And I took two semesters of Spanish 
in college.” Not technically an impressive accomplishment, but since 
the company does a lot of business in Latin America, you figure some 
Spanish is better than none at all.
Or is it?
Actually, it isn’t. You’ve just fallen victim to a phenomenon 
that psychologists have recently discovered, called the “Presenter’s 
Paradox.” It’s another fascinating example of how our instincts about 
selling — ourselves, our company, or our products — can be surprisingly 
bad.
The problem, in a nutshell, is this: We assume when we present 
someone with a list of our accomplishments (or with a bundle of 
services or products), that they will see what we’re offering additively. If 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  The Presentation Mistake You Don’t Know You’re Making
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

going to Harvard, a prestigious internship, and mad statistical skills are 
all a “10” on the scale of impressiveness, and two semesters of Spanish 
is a “2,” then we reason that added together, this is a 10 + 10 + 10 + 2, 
or a “32” in impressiveness. So it makes sense to mention your minimal 
Spanish skills — they add to the overall picture. More is better.
Only more is not in fact better to the interviewer (or the client or 
buyer), because this is not how other people see what we’re offering.
They don’t add up the impressiveness, they average it. They see the Big 
Picture — looking at the package as a whole, rather than focusing on the 
individual parts.
To them, this is a (10+ 10+ 10+ 2)/4 package, or an “8” in impressiveness. 
And if you had left off the bit about Spanish, you would have had a (10 + 
10+ 10)/3, or a “10” in impressiveness. So even though logically it seems 
like a little Spanish is better than none, mentioning it makes you a less 
attractive candidate than if you’d said nothing at all.
More is actually not better, if what you are adding is of lesser quality 
than the rest of your offerings. Highly favorable or positive things 
are diminished or diluted in the eye of the beholder when they are 
presented in the company of only moderately favorable or positive 
things.
Psychologists Kimberlee Weaver, Stephen Garcia, and Norbert Schwarz 
recently illustrated the Presenter’s Paradox in an elegant series of 
studies. For example, they showed that when buyers were presented 
with an iPod Touch package that contained either an iPod, cover, and 
one free song download, or just an iPod and cover, they were willing 
to pay an average of $177 for the package with the download, and $242 
for the one without the download. So the addition of the low-value 
free song download brought down the perceived value of the package 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  The Presentation Mistake You Don’t Know You’re Making
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

by a whopping $65! Perhaps most troubling, when a second set of 
participants were asked to play the role of marketer and choose which of 
the two packages they thought would be more attractive to buyers, 92% 
of them chose the package with the free download.
More just seems like it must be better when you are on the presenter’s 
end, even though it doesn’t seem that way at all when you are on the 
consumer’s end. And somehow, despite the fact that we are all both 
presenters and consumers in our everyday lives, we just don’t make the 
connection.
The same pattern emergences when you are creating deterrents or 
negative consequences to discourage bad behavior. In another study, 
participants were asked to choose between two punishments to give for 
littering: a $750 fine plus two hours of community service, or a $750 
fine. 86% of participants felt that the fine plus community service would 
be the stronger deterrent. But they were wrong — in fact, a separate 
set of participants rated the $750 with the two hours of community 
service as significantly less severe than the fine alone. Once again, they 
reasoned that the overall punishment was on average less awful because 
two hours of community service isn’t so bad.
If the bias in presenter thinking is so pervasive, how can we stop 
ourselves from making this kind of mistake? The short answer is that 
we need to remind ourselves when making any kind of presentation 
to think of the big picture. What does the package I am presenting look 
like taken as a whole, and are there any components that are actually 
bringing down its overall value or impact? Three 10’s and a 2 is not better 
than three 10’s. A free carwash with the purchase of any new car is not 
going to make your cars seem more valuable. If your very expensive 
luxury hotel rooms offer ocean views, silk sheets, and a Jacuzzi, don’t 
mention the ironing board in the closet or the coffeepot. And unless you 
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  The Presentation Mistake You Don’t Know You’re Making
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

speak Spanish well, keep your ability to count to ocho and ask where la 
biblioteca is to yourself.
This article was originally published online on October 23, 2012.
Heidi Grant is a social psychologist who researches, writes, 
and speaks about the science of motivation. Her books include 
Reinforcements: How to Get People to Help You, Nine Things Successful 
People Do DifferentlyDifferently, and No One Understands You and What to Do 
About It. She is EY US Director of Learning R&D.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  The Presentation Mistake You Don’t Know You’re Making
Copyright © 2012 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
