Digital
Article
Communication
Do You Need Charisma to
Be a Great Public Speaker?
by Sarah Gershman
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Do You Need Charisma to Be
a Great Public Speaker?
by Sarah Gershman
Published on HBR.org  /  December 13, 2019  /  Reprint H05BOF
master1305/Getty Images
I recently worked with a newly minted CEO who, faced with an
upcoming presentation, worried about his “lack of charisma.” He was an
engineer by training and an introvert who felt uncomfortable speaking
in front of groups. One of the reasons he was chosen for his position was
that he was considered a masterful listener. So we practiced bringing
listening into his speaking. Soon he realized that his greatest strength
as a speaker was not his ability to charm his audience, but his ability
to pay attention to their needs. Employees walked away from his
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Do You Need Charisma to Be a Great Public Speaker?
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

presentations motivated and “feeling understood.” This CEO may have
lacked charisma, but he had a far more valuable skill: presence.
My clients, particularly those in more technical fields, often suffer from
the same self doubt this CEO expressed — that they can never be great
speakers because they lack charisma. Who would listen to their “dry”
presentation or remember what they say?  How wrong they are! What
they need instead is presence. Presence is within reach of any speaker,
especially those in highly technical, “dry” fields.
For starters, it is critical to understand that charisma and presence are
different. Charisma involves radiating a certain magnetism, in which
others are drawn to you. Politicians tend to exude it, as do actors. This
is the “lighting up the room” factor. As a speaker, we often yearn to be
charismatic. We want people to be drawn to us and like us, but here’s
the catch — your job as a speaker is not to get the audience to like you,
but rather to get your message across. In fact, if the audience is too
focused on you, they may actually miss your point.
Here’s why. According to numerous studies, emotion is a basic currency
for remembering content. A listener must connect emotionally to what
they hear in order to remember what the speaker says. Simply, we
remember most vividly the events in our lives in which we were most
emotionally impacted.
Charisma actually can douse our emotional response. According to
a powerful study by Jochen Menges, a researcher and professor at
Cambridge’s Judge Business School in the UK, a charismatic speaker
will draw all the attention and can subsequently “suppress” the
listeners’ own emotional reactions. As a result, the audience will be
less likely to recall a charismatic speaker’s presentation. They might
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Do You Need Charisma to Be a Great Public Speaker?
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

remember that they liked the speaker, but they will likely not recall
what they said.
How many times have you listened to a captivating speaker and then
were not able to remember the key takeaways?
This is where presence comes in. There are many definitions of
presence out there. I would like to offer a literal one:
Presence is simply the ability to be fully present with the people in the
room and the message you are delivering to them. 
Presence is essentially the inverse of charisma. While charisma is
focused on the speaker, presence is focused on the audience. Presence
is about giving something valuable to the audience, not giving them a
charmed experience of yourself.
That was the genius of my CEO client — by focusing on what his
audience needed to hear, on what concerns, anxieties, or questions they
brought into the room, not on trying to show his smarts  — he helped
solve their problems and made them feel connected to him.
As presentation guru Nancy Duarte writes, “You may well be the
smartest person in the room where you’re giving your presentation, but
you must wield the power that knowledge gives you wisely and humbly.
You should never view a presentation as a chance to show how brilliant
you are. You want the audience to leave thinking, “Wow, spending time
in that presentation with (your name goes here) was a true gift. I’m
armed with insights and tools to help me succeed that I didn’t have
before.”
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Do You Need Charisma to Be a Great Public Speaker?
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Your presence is critical to your being able to deliver valuable and
relevant content.
Ironically, a perspective of presence — that one is “giving a gift” to the
audience — helps the speaker as much as it does the listener. Presence
enables the speaker to get out of their own head and connect directly to
the people in the room. Speakers who are able to be fully present with
their audience are less nervous and more effective.
What does presence look like?
For starters, the speaker’s attention is focused outward. Rather than
thinking about how one is being received, the speaker is focused on
whether the audience understands the message.
The speaker is actively thinking about their words as they speak. This
is the opposite of robotic memorizing, which inhibits presence. Even
when the speaker reads from a script, they are thinking about their
words as they read them.
Of course, this is easier said than done. Often, when one is about to
speak, the anxious mind naturally pulls the speaker away from the
present moment. My clients tell me that when they are trying to be
present, their mind is stuck in the past — remembering a previous
presentation that went awry or the preparation they neglected to do. Or
their mind is focused on the future — on the reaction of the audience
and the implications of their inevitable failure.
How can you cultivate presence in order to be able to be fully present
with the people in the room? Here are some ways to start.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Do You Need Charisma to Be a Great Public Speaker?
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

1. Prepare with presence. From the moment you begin to prepare,
focus on who will be in the room and on what they need from you. If
you build your presentation around the needs of your audience, it will
be easier to be present with them when it is time to speak. Always ask
who the audience will be!
2. Practice with presence. Each time you practice, aim to be even
more focused on directing your message to an audience — even if
that audience is imaginary. The moment you catch yourself going into
autopilot, stop and restart the sentence.
3. Get your mind present. Right before you get up to speak, take a
moment to jot down everything that is keeping you from being present
and put the paper aside. When I do this with my clients, their list is long
and includes negative prior speaking experiences, anxieties about lack
of preparation, fears of the audience’s reaction, upcoming meetings,
and other distracting thoughts. Taking a moment to jot them down and
putting the paper away helps to refocus the mind on the present task.
4. Get your body present. Right before you speak take 15 seconds to
open your posture. Having an open, connected posture tells your brain
it’s time to be fully present with your audience. What does an open
posture look like? If you’re sitting, hands are in front of you, above the
table. Your shoulders are back and relaxed. Your breathing is relaxed
and you are looking at the people you will be talking to. When you shift
to an open posture, you signal to your brain, “I am ready to be present
with the audience” and you automatically feel less nervous.
5. Begin with presence. Before you speak, take a moment to breathe
and look directly at your audience. Then begin with a “you” statement.
e.g “each of you in this room…” or “I want to share a story with you
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Do You Need Charisma to Be a Great Public Speaker?
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

about the power of…” This immediately signals to your brain that you
are focusing on the audience.
6. Speak with presence. As you speak, direct your energy towards the
individuals in the room. Look at one person at a time. Focus on making
sure each person listening fully understands your message.
Everyone can learn to cultivate presence — especially introverts. While
many extroverts have excellent presence, introverts have a distinct
advantage. Because introverts don’t demand as much energy from the
audience, they are able to be more present with the audience. When my
CEO client finally understood this, it was a game changer. He was finally
able to stop worrying about his likeability and focus on what actually
mattered — helping the audience.
You can be a masterful speaker and lack charisma. What you need
instead of charisma is presence.
Sarah Gershman is an executive speech coach and CEO of Green
Room Speakers. She is a professor at the McDonough School of
Business at Georgetown University, where she teaches public
speaking to leaders from around the globe.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Do You Need Charisma to Be a Great Public Speaker?
Copyright © 2019 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
6
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
