Digital 
Article
Business Communication
How to Nail the Q&A After 
Your Presentation
You can’t rehearse it, but you can be prepared. by Caroline Webb
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

How to Nail the Q&A After 
Your Presentation
You can’t rehearse it, but you can be prepared. by Caroline Webb
Published on HBR.org  /  January 24, 2020  /  Reprint H05DJE
HBR Staff/georgeclerk/Getty Images
If you’re not a huge fan of public speaking, you’re in good company. 
It’s such a widely shared source of anxiety that when psychologists 
want to induce unpleasant stress in a person for experimental purposes, 
they often use a public speaking task called the Trier Social Stress 
Test. The test requires people to give a talk and do sums in front of 
a panel of impassive listeners, and it reliably generates stress markers 
such as a faster heart rate, raised cortisol levels, and “enhanced skin 
conductance,” which is the polite way of saying sweaty palms.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Nail the Q&A After Your Presentation
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Of course, we can reduce our nerves by preparing well for our 
presentations. But when I help professionals get ready for a big meeting, 
I often hear about a specific concern. One of my clients recently told 
me, “I know my slides. I’m on top of the numbers and I’ve practiced 
my anecdotes. But I don’t look forward to the Q&A. I don’t know what 
people are going to ask, so I worry I won’t have a good answer for their 
questions. Or worse, that I’ll say something dumb.”
Unfortunately, research suggests they have a point. When we’re asked 
a tough question and we’re not sure how to respond, it can make us 
feel like we’ve lost control of the situation. That feeling gets coded as a 
potential threat by our brain, so it powers up a defensive fight-or-flightfight-or-flight
response while restricting activity in the parts of the brain associated 
with more complex reasoning. This redirection of mental resources 
makes perfect sense if the threat is a fire, and we simply need to run 
from a burning building as fast as possible. But it’s also why our mind 
can go blank just as we need to muster a brilliant comeback under 
pressure.
To allow yourself to think more clearly and creatively when faced with 
questions that aren’t easy to answer, you need to reduce the sense 
of threat and give yourself back a sense of control. Here are four 
approaches to practice.
Appreciate the conversation
Dead silence after you finish speaking is not what you want, unless 
you’re delivering a sermon in a monastery. Remind yourself that 
questions are good. They are a sign of an interesting talk, since they 
mean that your audience has paid attention to what you’ve said and 
is now actively reflecting on your content. Reframe the Q&A as a 
rewarding conversation that signals healthy engagement, and your 
brain is less likely to be on the defensive — which means you’ll be more 
likely to bring your best self to bear. Two specific things to try:
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Nail the Q&A After Your Presentation
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

• In the moment after you finish speaking, as the first person puts their 
hand up or opens their mouth to speak, tell yourself silently: “Aha, 
good — they’re interested!”
• Start your answer by appreciating the question. Try something like “I 
appreciate you raising that,” or “Thank you, that’s an important topic.”
The second of those approaches delivers the additional benefits of 
giving yourself an extra moment to think about your reply and of 
making your audience feel valued. While recording a podcast recently, I 
was asked a question by the host that I didn’t immediately know how to 
answer so I told him that he had asked a good question before I began 
my response. Later, he admitted “I know it’s silly, but I couldn’t help but 
feel good when you praised the quality of my question, even though I 
knew you were giving yourself a moment to think.”
Channel your empathy
Usually people ask questions not because they’re trying to trip you up, 
but because they want to understand the practical impact your ideas 
may have on their own job — their workload, their priorities, and their 
chances of success. So as you prepare the content of your presentation, 
make sure to also spend time seeing the content through the eyes of 
your audience. Consider what you would ask at the end of your talk if 
you were in their shoes. Think about three common themes that come 
up in the Q&A:
• What’s the downside for them? What would your audience see as the 
biggest obstacles to doing or acting on what you’ve talked about? Be 
ready to show you recognize their concerns, even if you don’t have a 
simple answer to the problem.
• What else do they care about right now? Perhaps they’re trying to 
implement a new strategic plan, or they’re busy building relationships 
with external stakeholders. Think ahead about how your material 
might link to those broader issues.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Nail the Q&A After Your Presentation
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

• What happens next? People have a built-in desire for clarity about 
certainties in a changing situation. You might not have a crystal ball 
but you can probably say something about the next step that flows
from your presentation.
Considering your audience’s perspective helps you stay calm by 
reminding you that you’re dealing with human beings, not enemy 
combatants. It also makes it more likely that you’ll have impact with 
your ideas.
I remember some years ago sitting with my team before a meeting with 
the board of a nonprofit, where we had helped build a new strategy 
for the organization. As we huddled around the flip chart ahead of 
the presentation and thought about the perspective of each person 
on the board, it dawned on us that the CEO might have particular 
reasons to feel wistful about letting go of past priorities. Thanks to this 
small amount of empathetic forethought, we were less unsettled by the 
questions he asked in the meeting and better able to emphasize ways 
that the new proposal built on his past successes, which helped the 
whole board enthusiastically endorse the new plan.
Start with agreement
Sometimes someone asks a question because they disagree with 
you. This can be a particularly delicate moment to handle, because 
disagreement all too easily puts people’s brains into defensive fight-or-fight-or-flight
flight mode. To help both of you think clearly and constructively, start 
your answer by focusing on where you agree. This helps create what 
psychologists call “in-group” — a sense of being on the same team and 
sharing common ground. It roots the exchange in the kind of mutual 
respect that helps to reduce the sense of threat in the situation.
Follow these steps (adapted from game theorist Anatol Rapaport) to 
defuse tension:
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Nail the Q&A After Your Presentation
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
4
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

• Briefly play back your understanding of their view. “If I understand 
you right, you feel…”
• Outline where you agree. “We’re aligned on much of this. We both 
think that… and…”
• Home in on where your real disagreement lies. “The one place we 
differ is…”
• Explain what’s shaped your point of view. “The reason for my 
perspective is that…”
I saw this done well by a senior manager in a tech company who was 
being challenged by a colleague on her ambitious timeline for a new 
product launch. Her response ran something like this: “If I understand 
you right, you feel it isn’t realistic to try to launch in three months. I 
think we all want to make sure the product is rock solid when it goes to 
market, and I agree timing is tight. I’m more optimistic than you about 
our chances of making this a success, though, because we’ve found a 
way to double the staff working on the project. I can tell you more about 
this offline.” By showing that she truly acknowledged and even agreed 
with some of her colleague’s perspective, her response was accepted 
more fully than if she had simply tried to reassure her colleague that all 
was going to be fine. She made him feel heard rather than dismissed.
Parry with curiosity
Sometimes the question you’re asked feels truly out of left-field, and 
it can make even the savviest presenter scramble for a response. This 
can happen when an audience member is trying to be entertaining or 
informative (“Isn’t this just like the Japanese knotweed problem?”) or, 
more commonly, when someone wants to shine a light on a very specific
situation that they’re personally dealing with. (“What are you going to 
do about the data on page 16 about the outages last month? It’s killing 
us.”)
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Nail the Q&A After Your Presentation
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
5
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

You can’t prepare an answer for this sort of unpredictable question. 
But you can be ready with a helpful state of mind: curiosity. Learning 
has been found to be inherently rewarding to our brains, which is one 
reason that asking a question of your own can be just enough to get you 
off the defensive. For example, you might say:
• “Can you tell me more about what’s driving your question?”
• “That’s intriguing — is this something you’ve experienced yourself?”
• “Is there a specific reason for your concern on this?”
And if you’re still left scratching your head after that gambit, go back 
to the first strategy above and appreciate the horizon-broadening input. 
“I’m not sure about that, but thank you — I’ll look into it and get back 
to you.” After all, you never know when you might need to know about 
knotweed.
This article was originally published online on January 24, 2020.
Caroline Webb is the author of How to Have a Good Day: Harness 
the Power of Behavioral Science to Transform Your Working Life. She 
is also CEO of coaching firm Sevenshift, and a senior adviser to 
McKinsey & Company. Follow her on Facebook or Google +.
@caroline_webb_
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  How to Nail the Q&A After Your Presentation
Copyright © 2020 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
6
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
