Digital 
Article
Business Communication
Speaking From a Podium: 
Simple Tips to Get Started
Speaking from a podium presents different challenges than other forms 
of public speaking. So the best preparation is to simulate the podium 
experience. For example, when Barack Obama had to debate John 
McCain at Old Miss in 2008, his team created an exact replica of 
the stage where Obama would debate McCain. “No detail was […] 
by Daniel Kennedy
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Speaking From a Podium: 
Simple Tips to Get Started
Speaking from a podium presents different challenges than other forms 
of public speaking. So the best preparation is to simulate the podium 
experience. For example, when Barack Obama had to debate John 
McCain at Old Miss in 2008, his team created an exact replica of 
the stage where Obama would debate McCain. “No detail was […] 
by Daniel Kennedy
Published on HBR.org  /  March 31, 2010  /  Reprint H004JB
Speaking from a podium presents different challenges than other 
forms of public speaking. So the best preparation is to simulate the 
podium experience.
For example, when Barack Obama had to debate John McCain at Old 
Miss in 2008, his team created an exact replica of the stage where 
Obama would debate McCain. “No detail was overlooked,” according to 
a Newsweek retrospective published just after the election. Incredibly, 
Obama even rehearsed in the evenings because the debate would be in 
the evening, and this would “match his natural circadian rhythms.”
This concept is nothing new. Obama was simulating the full experience. 
It’s why actors and dancers have dress rehearsals and soldiers have 
military exercises.
But you don’t need a stage or replica board room to prepare for your 
own presentation. Here’s the way to do it in a stepped-down manner 
and get the same benefits:
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Speaking From a Podium: Simple Tips to Get Started
Copyright © 2010 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
1
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

• Put your script or notes on a stack of books or something that will 
elevate them for easy viewing. At home or in a conference room, this 
will simulate the podium experience. Use your speaking voice as you 
would on stage, and imagine that you’re speaking to an audience.
• Keep your feet planted and stand straight. This will empower 
you. Stepping back and forth, slouching, shifting weight — these can 
convey anxiety.
• Consult the notes or script as much as you need during run-
throughs. Repetition will enable you to look down less often, so you 
can increase eye contact with your listeners.
• Have the script in large type, amply spaced — or use notes. You’ll 
be able to find your place more readily after looking at the audience. 
Why invite panicky moments when you lose your place or need to 
check a figure?
• Do not memorize, unless it’s very brief. Doing so will introduce a 
whole new dimension of anxiety. After a lot of rehearsal, you may be 
able to speak almost from memory, and that’s fine. But if you hold 
yourself to a word-for-word standard, you’re inviting anxiety when a 
phrase doesn’t fall in place.
• Make a place for your hands. Lightly grip either side of a straight-
backed chair at home — or if it’s a side chair in a conference room 
chair, grip the top — and then forget about your hands. They’ll come 
up naturally to gesture at times.
• Write a reminder. In large letters with a red pen, print atop your notes 
or script a single, important reminder. Choose well. It might be, “Speak 
Slowly.” Or, “Make Eye Contact.” Or, “Slow Down.” Take it to heart just 
before you start speaking.
Afterward, you may hear that your presentation was better than your 
self-assessment. This often means the anxiety you were feeling didn’t 
come through because you created a steady physical presence up there. 
Yes, you may have felt unnatural or “manufactured,” but it came across 
as confidently in command.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Speaking From a Podium: Simple Tips to Get Started
Copyright © 2010 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
2
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Once you’ve developed enough confidence and a good style at the mike, 
the value of this rehearsal regimen declines. Moreover, you may well 
discover shortcuts or tips of your own. Do you have any you can share 
now, which you think might help others?
Daniel Kennedy is an adjunct professor within the Graduate School of 
Management at UC Davis, where he has taught presentation skills and 
public communications strategy to MBA students for more than two 
decades. He also coaches executives, professors, and even children in the 
craft of public speaking.
This article was originally published online on March 31, 2010.
Daniel Kennedy is an adjunct professor within the Graduate School 
of Management at UC Davis, where he has taught presentation 
skills and public communications strategy to MBA students for more 
than two decades. He also coaches executives, professors, and even 
children in the craft of public speaking.
HBR  /  Digital Article  /  Speaking From a Podium: Simple Tips to Get Started
Copyright © 2010 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
