REPRINT F1903B
PUBLISHED IN HBR
MAY–JUNE 2019
ARTICLE
DEFEND YOUR RESEARCH
When You Pitch an  
Idea, Gestures Matter  
More Than Words
An Interview with Joep Cornelissen by Nicole Torres
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

Cornelissen: We did find that gestures 
were a really important way to get 
investors to buy into a fictional device 
that helped people recover from sports 
injuries. When the “entrepreneur”—an 
actor we’d hired—used his hands to 
explain the idea, investors were more 
interested in it than when he described 
it in straightforward technical terms 
or with metaphors, analogies, and 
anecdotes. Gesturing had a more direct 
impact than either kind of language did. 
We were surprised that the findings were 
so clear, given the emphasis on the use 
of rhetoric and storytelling in  
venture pitches and other kinds of 
persuasion. We tend to overlook 
nonverbal communication, but it  
seems to be critical. 
HBR: Why would investors be so swayed 
by gesturing? The data suggests that the 
hand motions gave them a better sense 
of what the product would look like 
and how it would work. The unfamiliar 
idea was made more concrete. We think 
this kind of information is especially 
important in uncertain, high-stakes 
contexts like pitch meetings, where 
investors are looking for a variety  
of cues that will help them evaluate 
ideas’ potential.
Or maybe people who gesture a lot seem 
more charismatic and therefore worth 
investing in? Studies have certainly 
shown that gestures can convey 
excitement and make investors attribute 
more passion to entrepreneurs. But 
we found that gestures communicate 
more about the business ideas, too. 
When we surveyed the investors who’d 
watched the pitches, we found that 
people who’d seen the gesturing version 
were more likely to say they had a good 
understanding of the new device. 
Are certain kinds of motions helpful? 
I often talk with my hands, but I’m 
not intentional about it. Most of 
us gesture all the time, sometimes 
unconsciously, though this varies 
from culture to culture. Generally, 
without noticing, we make a lot of 
“beat” gestures: repetitive motions that 
mark the rhythm of our speech. We 
use “cohesive,” or speech-structuring, 
Joep Cornelissen of Erasmus University and his team asked 
experienced investors to watch a video of an entrepreneur pitching 
a new device. He did four versions of the presentation: One used a 
lot of figurative language; one included frequent hand motions; one 
deployed both; and one used neither. People who saw the video  
with only the frequent gestures were on average 12% more interested 
in investing. The conclusion: 
Professor Cornelissen, 
DEFEND YOUR RESEARCH
Illustration by JOEL KIMMEL
When You Pitch an  
Idea, Gestures Matter  
More Than Words
COPYRIGHT © 2019 HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PUBLISHING CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
2
Harvard Business Review
May–June 2019
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (ﬁlms.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org 
or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

gestures to indicate the start or end 
of a sentence or points we’re going to 
make. There are also symbolic gestures 
that convey information. You can use 
your hands to reproduce the form of 
an object, point to a prop, describe a 
movement, or even express a feeling. 
We identified and coded all these kinds 
of gestures in a qualitative field study 
analyzing 17 actual entrepreneurs as 
they pitched ideas. Then we instructed 
our actor to make certain motions in 
his videos, such as sweeping his hands 
out to represent the growing market for 
the product.
Should everyone add symbolic hand 
movements to pitches? If you can be 
strategic and find one or two killer 
gestures that really mark your ideas or 
where you are with a venture—or that 
clarify what the product or service is 
about—that could do wonders. And 
just as you would rehearse what you’re 
going to say, you should practice your 
body language. We’ve seen lots of tech 
entrepreneurs coming right out of 
university who just stand behind the 
lectern and give very dry, technical 
pitches, without any hand movements 
at all. These don’t stand out as much 
as pitches by skilled presenters who 
gesture frequently.
How can you teach yourself to be 
good at gesturing if it doesn’t come 
naturally? Being attentive to how other 
people do it skillfully is a first step. 
Many politicians have started to use 
knuckle-pointing gestures—with the 
index figure curled—as Bill Clinton 
and Tony Blair do to emphasize points 
in speeches. Try out a few gestures 
and see which feel most powerful 
and authentic to you. Then, through 
repetition, you can train yourself  
to make them a natural part of your 
communication style.
Couldn’t all the gesturing backfire?  
Might people find it distracting? Too 
much could indeed be off-putting, 
making the pitch more of a pantomime. 
But this doesn’t happen in most 
pitches. Even when entrepreneurs use 
a lot more gestures than normal, if the 
motions are aligned with the speech, 
they do work. 
Still, we don’t want to overemphasize 
their effect. In our study we were 
asking general investors, who had no 
medical-device expertise, to evaluate 
the pitch, so they were probably keen 
for any information that could help 
them understand the product. In a 
real-world setting, they’d do further 
due diligence; a pitch isn’t the one and 
only moment that determines whether 
people put money into a venture. But 
it can either move them away from an 
idea or make them want to explore it 
further. What we measured, first with 
the professional investor group and 
then with students playing the role of 
investor, was intention to invest, not an 
actual handover of cash. 
Why did you also look at students? While 
our focus was on seeing what made 
a pitch effective with investors, we 
wanted to see if we could replicate 
the findings with another sample, and 
we did. But we found an interesting 
difference: Though investors didn’t 
seem to be swayed by how something 
was described or framed, the students 
Too much gesturing could be off-putting, making the pitch more of a pantomime.  
But this doesn’t happen in most pitches. Even when entrepreneurs use a lot more 
gestures than normal, if the motions are aligned with the speech, they do work.
were affected by figurative language. 
This suggests that investors primarily 
attend to the entrepreneurs’ physical 
cues and signals; they may strip away 
other details of the pitch to focus more 
on the people themselves. 
What other factors influence how 
investors react? We know gender  
does. Male entrepreneurs are much 
more likely to secure funding than 
female entrepreneurs are. Studies 
have also shown that investors base 
decisions on gut feelings about 
entrepreneurs and their teams. But 
surprisingly, no one had really explored 
what aspects of a pitch determine 
investors’ overall assessments. Teasing 
those apart is key. There are many 
other things to look at: whether people 
have certain objects in their hands, 
refer to a prototype, or take a certain 
position on stage.
So the next time I propose an idea, I need 
some gestures to go with it? Yes—find 
one or two that convey the main points 
you want to get across. In my own 
classes, I let groups of MBA students 
pitch the same idea and then ask them 
to rate who was the most memorable 
and persuasive. They usually choose 
presenters who used a few gestures 
around their main points. In other 
instances, I first have students do a 
pitch on their own and then train them 
to change their story and strategically 
add hand motions. The whole class can 
then see the before and after versions 
and how much difference carefully 
crafted body language makes. 
Interview by Nicole Torres
HBR Reprint F1903B
FOR ARTICLE REPRINTS CALL 800-988-0886 OR 617-783-7500, OR VISIT HBR.ORG
Harvard Business Review
May–June 2019  3
This document is authorized for use only by Joel Parisipogu (films.aster@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org
